Title: Quantifying Physiological Synchrony through Windowed Cross-Correlation Analysis: Statistical and Theoretical Considerations

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746v2.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 29

Markdown Content:
QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 2

# Quantifying Physiological Synchrony Using 

# Windowed Cross -Correlation Analysis: Statistical 

# and Theoretical Considerations 

Authors:  F. Behrens 1, , F. Diana 2, R . G. Moulder 3, , S. M. Boker 2, & M. E. Kret 1* .

Affiliations: 

1Leiden University, Institute of Psychology, Cognitive Psychology Unit, Wassenaarseweg 52, 

Leiden 2333 AK, The Netherlands. 

2Department of Social, Health and Organizational Psychology, Utrecht University, 

Heidelberglaan 1, 3584 CS Utrecht, The Netherlands 

3Department of Psychology, University of Virginia, Charlottesville, VA 22903, USA. 

Corresponding Author:  M. E. Kret, Leiden University, Institute of Psychology, Cognitive 

Psychology Unit, Wassenaarseweg 52, Leiden 2333 AK, The Netherlands; e -mail: 

m.e.kret@fsw.leidenuniv.nl .

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 3

# Abstract 

Interpersonal synchrony is a widely studied phenomenon. A great challenge is to statistically 

capture the dynamics of social interactions with fluctuating levels of synchrony and varying 

delays between responses of individuals. Windowed Cross -Correlation a nalysis accounts for 

both characteristics by segmenting the time series into smaller windows and shifting the 

segments of two interacting individuals away from each other up to a maximum lag. Despite 

evidence showing that these parameters affect the estima ted synchrony level, there is a lack of 

guidelines on which parameter configurations to use. The current study aimed to close this 

knowledge gap by comparing the effect of different parameter configurations on two outcome 

criteria: i) the ability to distin guish synchrony from pseudosynchrony by means of surrogate 

data analyses and ii) the sensitivity to detect change in synchrony as measured by the difference 

between two within -subject conditions. Focusing on physiological synchrony, we performed 

these anal yses on heartrate, skin conductance level, pupil size, and facial expressions data. 

Results revealed that a range of parameters were able to discriminate synchrony from 

pseudosynchrony. Window size was more influential than the maximum lag with smaller 

win dow sizes showing better discrimination. No clear patterns emerged for the second criterion. 

Integrating the statistical findings and theoretical considerations regarding the physiological 

characteristics and biological boundaries of the signals, we provid e recommendations for 

optimizing the parameter settings to the signal of interest. 

Keywords:  Windowed Cross -Correlation analysis; interpersonal synchrony; parameter 

optimization; surrogate data; time series analysis. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 4

# Introduction 

During social interactions, humans tend to synchronize on different levels . They mimic 

motor movements, such as  postures  (Tia et al., 2011) , facial expressions  (Altmann et al., 2021; 

Riehle et al., 2017) , scratching and yawning  (Diana et al., 2023; Schut et al., 2015), and motion 

activity (Altmann et al., 2020)  and align their level of physiological arousal (Feldman et al., 

2011; Levenson & Gottman, 1983; Prochazkova et al., 2018). Although this synchrony comes 

naturally and without effort, it is a great challenge for social scientists to measure it statistically ,

particularly for physiological synchrony, where signals are continuous and constantly 

fluctuating.  This challenge is especially pronounced in naturalistic interactions, which are 

shaped by a continuous back -and -forth of signals and responses between individuals, with 

varying time delays and fluctuating levels of alignment that are difficult to statistically capture. 

To address this challenge, the current paper builds on p revious work on movement synchrony 

(Boker et al., 2002 ) to propose  Windowed Cross -Correlation (WCC)  as a solution to capture 

the  dynamic changes in heartrate, skin conductance level, facial expression, and pupil size 

(Boker et al., 2002).  We  first describ e the WCC method and the challenge of selecting 

appropriate parameter configurations. We then present an empirical comparison of parameter 

settings across two criteria , the ability to distinguish synchrony from pseudosynchrony, and the 

sensitivity to detect changes in synchron y,  tested on physiological data from a face -to -face 

storytelling paradigm. Based on these comparisons,  our a im is to provide  recommendations to 

help researchers make well -informed decisions in applying the WCC analysis. 

Synchrony is a multifaceted phenomenon evident on the behavioral, physiological, and 

neural level. Not surprising then, the causes and consequences of synchrony have been studied 

in a broad range of contexts investigating the dynamic nature of social inter actions from clinical 

(Galazka et al., 2019; Wehebrink et al., 2018), developmental (de Klerk et al., 2018; Shih et al., 

2019), evolutionary ( Diana & Kret, 2025; Palagi et al., 2009), neural (Hasson  et al.,  2004; 

Prochazkova et al., 2018), social (Behrens et al., 2020; Tarr et al., 2016 ; Diana et al., 2025 ), 

and cognitive (Kret  et al.,  2015; Kret & De Dreu, 2017) perspectives.  Crucially, many of the 

interpersonal processes influenced by synchrony, such as therapeutic interactions  (Ramseyer & 

Tschacher, 2011) , mother -infant exchanges (Feldman et al., 2011), and trust decisions  (Diana 

et al., 2025) , are inherently lagged in nature, where one person's signal triggers a delayed 

response in the other and lead -follow dynamics shift across the course of an interaction. 

A variety of methods have been proposed in previous literature to quantify synchrony 

including correlations, regressions, structural equation models and recurrence quantification 

analysis. These approaches differ in their assumptions, their operationalizat ion of synchrony, 

and the type of synchrony they measure (for a review, see (Gates & Liu, 2016; McAssey et al., 

2013; Schoenherr et al., 2018; Thorson et al., 2017).  For continuous physiological time -series, 

which are the focus of this article, an ideal me thod needs to fulfill three criteria:  First, it should 

capture both simultaneous (in -synch) responses, e.g., where two individuals  react 

simultaneously to an external event , and lagged responses, where  one individual responds to 

another  individual  or at a different pace.  Second, it should allow for changes in the level of 

synchrony across the interaction, reflecting moments of stronger and weaker coupling. Third, 

rather than categorizing intervals as synchronous or not (as in Altmann, 2011), it should provi de 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 5

a continuous estimate of synchrony strength.  This is particularly important for physiological 

signals, which are constantly fluctuating and rarely settle into discrete states that can cleanly be 

labeled as synchronous or non -synchronous. For instance, two individuals' heartrates may 

partially overlap  in their fluctuations for a period without ever reaching a clear threshold of 

synchrony, yet this partial coupling may still carry meaningful information about their 

interaction. While reducing synchrony to a b inary classification is a valuable approach for 

movement synchrony, where people can either move or not, it may not be optimal for 

physiological signals.  A method that fulfills these different criteria is Windowed Cross -

Correlation analysis, the focus of the current study (Boker et al., 2002). 

Windowed Cross -Correlation (WCC) analysis offers a neat method to account for 

dynamic changes in synchrony (Boker et al., 2002). This is achieved by extending a classical 

cross -correlation estimate by two aspects:  windows  and  lags . Rather  than calculating a 

correlation coefficient over the whole time series, the signals are broken into smaller 

overlapping segments or windows.  The strength of alignment to be estimated separately for 

each window, thus allowing synchrony to vary from stronger to weaker across the interaction. 

Introducing the lag is useful to  account for  the natural back -and -forth dynamics of social 

interaction: within each window, segments are shifted relative to one another up to a maximum 

lag, capturing the lead -follow dyn amics between individuals (e.g.,  Person A responds to Person 

B and a moment later the pattern is reversed ). Despite these advantages, the method requires 

researchers to specify parameters that tailor the analysis to the signal of interest. While Boker 

et al. (2002) provided guidance on these parameters for motor movement data, no guidelines 

exist for physiolo gical measures. The current paper aims to close this gap. 

WCC  parameters 

The WCC analysis requires the specification of  four parameters  that tailors the method 

to the signal of interest: window size, maximum lag, window increment, and lag increment (see 

Figure 1). Carefully choosing the right parameter settings is crucial, because these settings can 

substantially affect the outcome of the  WCC (Schoenherr et al., 2018). 

Window size 

The  window size determines the number of samples in each sliding window across the 

time series.  It should  be small enough to be sensitive to changes in  the synchrony strength, in 

the  lead -follow relationship between individuals , and to satisfy the  assumption of local (Boker 

et al., 2002). Disregarding fluctuations within a large window might undermine the strength of 

association at certain moments. However,  the window should be large enough (i.e., have enough 

data points) to provide reliable correlation est imates. While  50 -70 values have been proposed 

as sufficient (Cappella, 1996), more recent work performing Monte -Carlo simulations 

recommends 65 to 250 values, depending on the strength of the correlation (Schönbrodt & 

Perugini, 2013). Given the high sampling rates inco rporated in many psychophysiological 

measurement devices, this range should be fairly easy to accomplish, if the window size is not 

overly small.  The biological nature of the signal also matters:  slower signals such as skin 

conductance require  longer windows than faster signals such as facial expressions . Decisions 

on the window size should  therefore balance  both statistical and theoretical considerations. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 6

Maximum Lag 

The  maximum lag indicates  how far (i.e.,  the maximum number of samples ) one window 

is shifted  relative to the other, an d consequently defines the maximum delay within which two 

responses are still considered reactions to one another . For example, if the maximum lag is three 

seconds and Person A  smiles two seconds after Person B, this would be captured; if that smile 

occurs four seconds later, it would not be considered a response anymore . If the maximum lag 

is too long, synchrony might be attributed to unrelated events ; if too small,  meaningful  delayed 

responses  may be  missed.  Prior  work suggests that the maximum lag matters : for instance, skin 

conductance responses within but not beyond seven seconds have been shown to correlate with 

empathetic counselor -client relationships (Robinson et al., 198 2) . However,  this study did not 

directly compare whether shorter latencies predicted the relationship better than longer ones. 

Furthermore, the broad categorization of latencies (responses between 0 and 7 seconds 

compared to responses between 7 and 40 seconds) does not  allow for fine -grained conclusions 

about which maximum lag is optimal. Thus, although this provides an indication that the 

maximum lag indeed matters, a systematic comparison of different maximum lags is needed to 

make well -informed decisions  on this parameter .

Window Increment and Lag Increment 

The  window increment determines the size of the steps (i.e., the number of samples) 

when moving from one window segment to the next , regulating the temporal resolution of the 

analysis . When  the increment  equals  one, then the window is moved by one data point ; when it 

is the  same size as the window size or greater, adjacent windows are non -overlapping. 

Similarly, the fourth parameter, the lag increment, indicates how big the steps are between time 

lags.  For both parameters, smaller increments yield better re solution but at the cost of increased 

computational time. Crucially, however, estimates will eventually stabilize as increments 

decrease , making the  information that can be added not worth  of the increased  computational 

time. Comparing it to sampling rates, if one aims to measure heartrate changes, a sampling rate 

of 1000 Hz gives a smooth signal. Increasing the sampling rate to 2000 Hz adds little 

information because the heartrate does not change this fast  and so very similar heartrate signals 

using both s ampling rates. Similarly, increasing the resolution of the increment of the moving 

windows and lags will eventually stabilize around a correlation estimate.  Naturally, the lower 

bound of both increments parameters will be determined by the sampling rate of the device. 

Setting these parameters is therefore a matter of balancing resolution against computational 

efficiency .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 7      

> Figure 1. Schematic outline of the four parameters that are specified in the WCC analysis: window size ( wSize ), window
> increment ( wInc ), maximum lag ( tMax ), and lag increment ( tInc ). The abbreviations tMax and tInc originate from using ‘tau’
> (τ) to refer to the lags in the cross -correlation equation. i

Criteria to determine the best parameters 

To  determine the best parameter configurations, we used two criteria. The first criterion 

was the ability to discriminate synchrony from pseudosynchrony , defined as the  spurious 

synchrony that arises between individuals not engaged in actual information exchange 

(Moulder et al., 2018).  Such spurious synchrony exists because physiological signals are 

constrained in their patterns : heartrate, for instance, fluctuates within a certain range regardless 

of social context, creating baseline similarities between any two individuals' signals , even more 

so if individuals are engaged in similar activities  (i.e., participating in a study with the same 

procedure across dyads).  Howev er, the changes  occurring during spurious synchrony  stay in a 

certain range causing recursiveness and commonality within and between heartrate measures. 

Consequently , the null hypothesis for synchrony testing is not zero but some fundamental 

baseline value, necessitating an appropriate comparison . It is therefore necessary to find an 

appropriate comparison between the level of synchrony of individuals engaging in an 

interaction and the level of synchrony that occurs due to the nature of the signals. One way  to 

account for pseudosynchrony is to perform a surrogate data analysis (Moulder et al., 2018). The 

idea is that the original or true time -series is compared to the same time -series where synchrony 

is destroyed while keeping all other properties constant.  Specifically,  synchrony levels from 

true interacting dyads are compared to those from newly generated dyads of participants who 

never actually interacted . To generate these dyads, the time -series from each participant is 

coupled with every other participan t, testing  whether being in an interaction adds something 

over and beyond  what is expected from shared situational and biological factors alone .

The second criterion was the sensitivity to detect changes in synchrony in response to 

experimental manipulations , a key requirement for studying the  underlying  mechanisms ,

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 8

boundary conditions  and individual differences in synchrony.  For example,  previous studies ,

we observed that physiological synchrony  affected behavioral outcomes , but only when 

participants  could see each other  (our manipulation) (Behrens et al., 2020 ; Diana et al., 2025 ). 

Another study investigated the effect of emotional salience during storytelling on pupil mimicry 

and showed that physiological coupling between the speaker and the listener was stronger 

during emotionally intense moments compared to less salient moments  (Kang & Wheatley, 

2017). Storytelling is  a particularly interestin g setting . It  is a uniquely human and universal 

activity creating social bonds between people (Smith et al., 2017) , and it is also an inherently 

lagged activity  where one participants liste ns and the other tells the story. 

Based on the lagged nature of story -telling and the effect of face -to -face contact on 

physiological synchrony , in the current study  two individuals engaged in face -to -face 

storytelling . Participants also  completed baseline measures  of eye contact in silence . In line 

with the findings by Kang and Wheatley (2017), we  expect  higher levels of synchrony when 

people  engage  in storytelling compared to the baseline measure.  These two conditions are ideal 

to test whether  the  WCC  analysis  we use to compute synchrony  will be sensitive enough  to 

detect  changes  in synchrony between the two (within -subject) conditions. The aim of the 

current study  is  to determine the best parameter configurations for the Windowed Cross -

Correlation (WCC) analysis applied to different common physiological measures. In line with 

the definition provided by Altman (2011), we operationalize synchrony as a temporary linear 

relationship between two time series , focusing  on time series describing physiological changes 

over time in two individuals. We tested  the two  criteria  outlined above  on data from dyadic 

interactions where two individuals told each other four stories. Durin g the interaction, their 

heartrate, skin conductance level, pupil size, and contractions of the left zygomaticus major 

(muscle associated with smiling) were measured. We chose these four measures as they have 

all been shown to synchronize between individua ls, include both sympathetic and 

parasympathetic responses, and are prominent measures in the literature (for recent reviews, 

see Palumbo et al., 2017; Prochazkova & Kret, 2017 ; Diana & Kret, 2025 ). For a range of 

window sizes and maximum lags that were ta ilored to each signal, we calculated a measure of 

distance for the comparison (i) between the true dyads and newly generated surrogate dyads, 

and (ii) between intervals of storytelling and baseline measures in the true dyads. The window 

and lag increments  were not systematically compared, but were adjusted as a function of the 

window size and maximum lag, respectively. Based on the outcome of these comparisons, we 

provide recommendations on which parameter configurations are best for detecting synchrony 

and  change in synchrony for the four physiological measures. 

# Method 

Participants 

In total, 34 same -sex dyads participated in the study , of which six dyads had to be 

excluded due to technical problems (dyads included in analysis: Female = 22 (78 %), Male = 6 

(22 %) ; Mage  = 22.79;  SD age  = 3.23; Dutch = 17 (30%)). Participants were recruited via the 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 9

Leiden University online recruitment system, flyers distributed around the university building, 

and through personal contacts. In the latter case, the participant was tested by a researcher  they 

did not know. The relationship between the two participants was not formally assessed, but 

verbal questioning confirmed that no dyad consisted of (close) friends. Individuals had normal 

or corrected -to -normal vision wearing contact lenses. Glasses were no t compatible with the 

eye -tracking glasses worn during the exp eriment. The duration of the study was about one hour 

and participants received two course credits or 6€, and chocolate for compensation. The study 

was approved by the local Psychology Ethics Committee of Leiden University (CEP19 -

0313/208). 

Design 

The design of the study is outlined in Figure 2. The study consisted of two parts : (1) 

participants completed a breathing exercise where they were instructed to look at each other 

and synchronize their breathing ; and (2)  participants engaged in storytelling with each 

participant telling a neutral and a positive story while the other participant was listening.  In 

total, participants told each other four stories, with Stories 1 (positive) & 3 (neutral) told by 

participant 1  while participant 2 was listening,  and  Stories 2 (positive) & 4 (neutral)  being told 

by participant 2  while participant 1 was listening, with the starting stories order was 

counterbalanced between dyads. The breathing and storytelling parts were both preceded by a 

2-min baseline measure where participants were instructed to relax and look at each other. After 

the second baseline measure and after each story, participants fill ed out the PANAS (Positive 

And Negative Affect Schedul e – Watson,  et al.,  1988) to measure their current affect. 

Furth ermore,  they rated each story with regard to its valence and intensity on a scale from 0 to 

10. The PANAS , the story ratings , and the rest of the questionnaires scores  are  beyond the 

scope of this study , but the descriptive statistics are provided in Table S1 (Supplementary 

Materials). 

Procedure 

Upon arrival at the lab, participants were separated, received information about the 

study, and gave informed consent for participation. Afterwards, electrodes were attached to the 

face, fingers, and the torso as preparation for the measurement of EMG, EDA , and ECG 

activity, respectively. Specifically, two electrodes were attached to the non -dominant hand on 

the intermediate phalanges of the index and ring finger to measure skin conductance level; three 

electrodes were attached on the left and right side of  the abdomen and on the thorax below the 

right collar bone to measure heartrate; and three electrodes were attached to the left face on the 

zygomaticus major and behind the ear to measure facial expressions. After the preparation, 

participants filled out t he Interpersonal Reactivity Inventory (IRI  – Davis , 1980) and the Five 

Facet Mindfulness Questionnaire (FFMQ; Baer,  et al., 2006) . Next, participants were seated on 

the same table , and wore  the  eye -tracking devices Tobii Pro Glasses 2 , which were subsequen tly 

calibrated. Afterwards, the experimenters left the room and started the recordings of the 

physiological measures . Participants received  pre -recorded instructions via speakers. The 

breathing, baseline and storytelling parts were completed as described in the Design section 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 10 

above and outlined in Figure 2. At the end, participants put all filled out papers in an envelope ,

and were debriefed and rewarded for their participation.    

> Figure 2. The time course of the study. The study was divided into two parts: breathing exercise (Part 1) and storytelling (Part
> 2). During the dark grey epochs, people interacted with each other; during light grey epochs, they prepared the storytelling and
> filled out questionnaires; P1/P2 = Participant 1 and 2; PANAS = Positive And Negative Affect Schedule; Story 1 & 2 and Story
> 3 & 4 were of the same valence (positive or neutral), the order of starting with the positive or neutral story was counterbal ance d
> between dyads.

Preprocessing of the physiological measures 

The physiological measures were recorded with the MP160 BIOPAC data acquisition 

system at a sampling rate of 2000 Hz and were pre -processed offline with the PhysioData 

Toolbox (Sjak -Shie, 2017). Using the Toolbox’s standard preprocessing settings, the hear trate 

data were preprocessed applying a band -pass filter between 1Hz and 50Hz. R -peaks were 

detected and transformed to inter -beat intervals (IBI) and subsequently to heartrate (bpm) 

values. The skin conductance signal was low -pass filtered with a cut -off  of 5Hz. The EMG 

signal was preprocessed with a low -pass FIR filter of 28Hz and a high -pass FIR filter of 500Hz 

and a Notch -filter of 50Hz. The rectified signal was subsequently smoothed with a Boxcar filter 

of 100ms. The pupil size data were preprocessed i n multiple stages according to recommended 

guidelines described elsewhere (Kret & Sjak -Shie, 2018). After applying the filters, each signal 

was visually inspected. If missing or incorrect intervals were manually detected, the signals 

were linearly interpol ated. Finally, all signals were down -sampled to 20Hz. 

Windowed Cross -Correlation analysis 

Two challenges in analyzing physiological responses between two individuals include 

i) to statistically represent the dynamics of an interaction and ii) to quantify the associated 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 11 

patterns in that might vary in the strength of association and the timing of the responses. 

Windowed Cross -Correlation (WCC) analysis offers a method that addresses both challenges. 

Specifically, the two time -series are broken into smaller, overlapping win dows before the 

correlation is estimated for each window. This way, the strength of association can vary 

between these windows accounting for the non -stationarity of the signals. The overlap between 

windows assures that strong synchronization that occurs a t the edge of non -overlapping 

adjacent segments is not missed. Additionally, for each window, the two segments are lagged 

away from each other up to a maximum lag such that the segment of either participant 1 or 

participant 2 precedes the other participant ’s segment in time , accounting  for the (varying) delay 

between individuals’ responses. This generates a result matrix r with correlations for the 

different segments and time lags defined as 

𝑟 (𝑊𝑥 , 𝑊𝑦 ) = 1

𝑇 𝑊 

∑

> 𝑇 𝑤
> 𝑡 =1

(𝑊 𝑥 𝑡  − 𝑊𝑥 )(𝑊 𝑦 𝑡  − 𝑊𝑦 )

𝑠𝑑 (𝑊𝑥 )𝑠𝑑 (𝑊𝑦 )

Where  𝑇 𝑤  is the total amount of observations in each window  𝑊𝑥  and  𝑊𝑦  consisting 

of observations  𝑊 𝑥 𝑡  and  𝑊 𝑦 𝑡  where  𝑡  Є {1, …,  𝑇 𝑤 ),  𝑊𝑥  and  𝑊𝑦  are the means of the 

observations in each window, and  𝑠𝑑 (𝑊𝑥 ) and  𝑠𝑑 (𝑊𝑦 ) the standard deviations of each 

window. In the result matrix, each row represents one window, while each column represents 

one lag. Because the first window needs to lag segments up to the maximum lag and because 

the window includes more than one data poi nt, the number of rows is given by ( N – wSize  –

tMax ) /  wInc . Dividing by  wInc  accounts for how many observations are skipped between one 

window and the next one. For example, if the window increment is one, then the number of 

rows of the result matrix will be equal to the number of observations of the time -series (after 

accounting  for the window size and maximum lag as just described). But if the increment is 10, 

then the steps are bigger between the windows, reducing the number of segments needed to 

cover  the whole time -series and therefore decreasing the number of rows in the result matrix. 

The number of columns in the result matrix is ( tMax  * 2) /  tInc  + 1 because the segments are 

shifted such that first Participant 1 and then Participant 2 precedes the other participant up to 

the maximum lag (i.e., twice the  tMax ). The  tInc  accounts for the size of the steps between two 

lags. The extra column (+1) represents the case where the lag is zero. 

Peak picking. 

Following the WCC analysis, Boker et al. (2002) developed the so -called peak -picking 

algorithm where the maximum correlation across different lags is determined for each window 

(i.e., the maximum correlation per row of the result matrix). The maximum corre lation should 

be preceded and succeeded by lower correlation values. For example, if Participant 1 

synchronizes with Participant 2 with a lag of 1 second, then the correlation should be highest 

(i.e., peaks) at that time lag and the correlation should be l ower at both lag .5 and 1.5 seconds. 

This “peak” is implemented to ensure that individuals indeed react to one another. If both 

individuals did nothing, they both would show more or less flat lines in their physiological 

responses and the correlation betwe en their signals would be high for all lags. Requiring a peak 

in the correlation across lags prevents such events from being termed “synchrony”. The peak 

picking algorithm outputs a matrix with the maximum (i.e., peak) correlation with its 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 12 

corresponding time lag for each window. In a last step, a summary statistic is computed by 

calculating the mean of the maximum correlations. This measure provides an indication of the 

overall level of synchrony between the two time -series. 

Choosing values for parameter configurations 

To quickly recap , there are  four parameters that need to be specified: window size, 

window increment, maximum lag, and lag increment. The window size ( wSize ) determines how 

long each window is, the window increment ( wInc ) indicates the size of the steps between two 

adjacent  windows, the maximum lag ( tMax ) regulates how far the segments of the two time -

series are shifted away from each other, and the lag increment ( tInc ) determines the size of the 

steps with which the segments are shifted. 

Figure 3. 

Examples 

of WCC 

analysis plots using heartrate data and a window size and a maximum lag of (a) 8 sec and (b) 20 sec, representing a  optimal 

and  suboptimal  example of parameter settings, respectively. Between around 100 and 200 seconds, people engage in a breathing 

exercise where they breathe synchronously which is reflected in the steadily high correlations around the time lag of zero. 

To  determine  the range of values  for the window size and maximum lag parameters, we 

employed a bottom -up approach.  Fist, we run  preliminary WCC analyses on the whole time -

series (including all data of the study) , and visually inspected the resulting matrix plots. 

Optimal parameter configurations produce sharp contrasts between regions of high and low 

a) 

b) 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 13 

synchrony, whereas suboptimal configurations yield a smoothed image with less contrast, 

making differences harder to detect (see Figure 3) . For the maximum lag, we additionally 

checked whether peak correlations fell within the range of lags or outside the plot boundaries, 

which would indicate the lag range was too narrow.  Second , we ensured the range of parameters 

included  values  previously used in the literature.  Third , we set the minimum window size to 3 

seconds, corresponding to at least 60 data points  at our 20Hz  sampling rate, in line with 

guidelines for reliable correlation estimation  (Schoeneberger, 2016).  For the sake of simplicity, 

the range of maximum lags was equal to the range of window sizes.  The window size and 

maximum lag parameters chosen for each physiological measure are listed in Table 1. For the 

window and lag increment parameters, we used  1 

> 10
> th

of the window size and the maximum lag, 

respectively. 

Table 1 

Window size and maximum lag parameters used for each physiological measure. 

Signal  Window size  Maximum lag 

Heartrate  4 – 12 sec in 

steps of ½ sec 

4 – 12 sec in 

steps of ½ sec 

Skin conductance level  5 – 25 sec in 

steps of 1 sec 

5 – 25 sec in 

steps of 1 sec 

Pupil size  3 – 9 sec in 

steps of ½ sec 

3 – 9 sec in steps 

of ½ sec 

Facial expression  3 – 9 sec in 

steps of ½ sec 

3 – 9 sec in steps 

of ½ sec 

Note . The window and lag increments were equal to  1 

> 10
> th

of the window size and the maximum 

lag, respectively. 

Choosing the best parameter settings 

We conducted the WCC and peak picking analysis for all combinations of the window 

size and maximum lag parameters with their corresponding increments as described in the 

previous section. For each parameter configuration, we calculated the mean peak correl ation 

across window segments per dyad as the measure of synchrony. To determine the best 

parameter configurations for each physiological measure we used  the  two criteria  outlined in 

the introduction : (i) the ability to discriminate synchrony from pseudosyn chrony, and (ii) the 

ability to detect  change  in synchrony. 

For the first criterion, we compared the true dyads  (i.e.,  individuals  who actually 

interacted  during the experiment ) with the surrogate dyads  (i.e.,  all possible  pairings  of pairing 

individuals who did not interact ). If  the specific social interaction  evoked synchrony above and 

beyond the synchrony  shared situational factor , synchrony levels  should be  higher in the true 

compared to the surrogate dyads.  As such , we  computed  the mean peak correlation for true and 

the surrogate dyads , testing  whether specific  parameter configurations were more sensitive  in 

detecting the difference  between synchrony (true dyads) and pseudosynchrony (surrogate 

dyads).  Sensitivity to detect this difference was quantified using the t -statistic of an independent 

samples t -test between the mean peak correlations of the two groups, with a positive t -statistic 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 14 

indicating higher synchrony in the true dyads. Importantly, we used the t -statistic purely as a 

measure of distance between group means rather than for hypothesis testing, and therefore 

interpret results in relative rather than absolute terms  and do not draw any conclusions about 

whether the differences reveal significant results or not.  The analysis was conducted on data 

from the first baseline measure and replicated on the second baseline measure to assess 

robustness. 

For the second criterion,  the ability to detect changes in synchrony , we  focused  on true 

dyads and  examined  which parameter configurations  were most sensitive to detecting changes 

in synchrony between  the baseline and the story telling conditions . A paired t -test was used as 

a measure of distance between mean synchrony levels during storytelling and baseline, with a 

positive t -statistic indicating higher synchrony during storytelling. To ensure robustness, the 

analysis was run twice: once comparing  stories told by Participant 1 with the baseline measures, 

and once for stories told by P articipant 2  (see Supplementary Materials for the reasoning behind 

the choice of these comparisons).  Only the first three minutes of each story were used to equate 

story length , and each comparison included both a positive and a neutral story given that a 

preliminary analysis revealed no differences between story valences.  The only difference was 

that in the first comparison, Participant 1 told the stories and in the second comparison, 

Participant 2 told the stories. Being Participant 1 or 2 was based on th e participant number and 

therefore should not have had any systematic impact on the synchrony level between the two 

individuals. 

# Results 

Synchrony versus pseudosynchrony 

Heartrate.  Multiple parameter configurations successfully differentiated true from 

surrogate dyads  (Figure 4a) , with the best discrimination (t = 28.32) observed for the smallest 

window size (4 sec) and a maximum lag of 7.5 sec (Figure 5a).  When mapping the t -statistics 

distribution onto the parameter configuration space, a clear pattern emerged:  smaller window 

sizes consistently  resulted in  larger t -statistics, while excessively large window sizes caused 

synchrony estimates to flip, with surrogate dyads s howing higher synchrony than true dyads ,

even more so when  paired with small maximum lags  (dark blue coloring in Figure 5a) . This 

pattern  is  evident by the gradual changes in coloring from blue to yellow in Figure 5a when 

moving down the y -axis (i.e., moving from large to small window sizes). The maximum lag 

was less  influential but still important  on differentiating between  synchrony from 

pseudosynchrony,  with optimal performance around twice the window size  (4 sec). Increasing 

or decreasing the maximum lag reduced the sensitivity to distinguish between the true and 

surrogate dyads as indicated by less yellow colors when moving left or right  on the x -axis in 

Figure 5a.  The replication analysis  on the data from the second baseline  confirmed this pattern 

(maximum t = 35.23, window size = 4 sec, maximum lag = 9 sec) , with the  maximum lag 

differed slightly by 1.5 sec showing the highest t -statistic at 9 sec. In conclusion,  given the  aim 

of the study  to  verify whether synchrony evolved as a result of interpersonal processes during 

a conversation above and beyond the shared environment of two participant, the range of 

parameters able to detect that d ifference is rather wide. In general, we recommend using a small 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 15 

window size for heartrate synchrony. Regarding the maximum lag, the choice of parameters is 

less influential, however, we recommend using a maximum lag that is around twice the window 

size. 

Skin conductance level.  As with heartrate synchrony,  Multiple parameter 

configurations  were sensitive to distinguish the true from the surrogate dyads (see Figure 4b). 

The largest t -statistic of 37.71 was observed for a window size of 6 sec and a maximum lag of 

24 sec (see Figure 5b).  Excessively large window sizes paired with small maximum lags caused 

synchrony estimates to invert, with surrogate dyads appearing more synchronized than true 

dyads.  Notably, unlike heart rate,  discriminative ability steadily  increased when small window 

sizes were combined with progressively larger maximum lags  (around four times the window 

siz e), a  pattern  replicated in the replication analysis  (maximum t = 48.71; window size = 5 sec, 

maximum lag = 21 sec  - see Figure S1b -S2b ).  Based on these results, we recommend using a 

small window size and a large maximum lag that is around four times the window size. 

Pupil size.  Also in this case, t he number of positive t -statistics depicted in Figure 4c 

indicates that  several  parameter configurations  could differentiate synchrony from 

pseudosynchrony. The maximum t -statistic of 16.12 was associated with a window size of 3 

sec and a maximum lag of 9 sec. The general pattern as for the other measures was observed: 

the smaller the window size, the greater  the difference between the true and surrogate dyads ,

while and excessively  large  window size would estimate  larger  synchrony  for the surrogate 

compare d to the true dyads  (see Figure 5c) . The maximum lag  was less influential than the 

window size,  showing only a slight tendency toward larger values.  The replication analysis 

confirmed this pattern  (maximum t = 18.04; window size = 3 sec, maximum lag = 6.5 sec) . In 

conclusion, smaller window sizes were more sensitive to distinguishing synchrony from 

pseudosynchrony in pupil size data. The maximum lag did not have as much of an impact, but 

should be set to two to three times the window size. 

Facial expression.  All t -statistics were positive indicating that the level of synchrony 

was higher for the true compared to the surrogate dyads for all parameter configurations , though 

with less variance than the other measures (range: 1.68 to 5.14; Figure 5d). The best 

discrimination  (t = 5.14)  was observed for the smallest window size (3 sec) and a maximum lag 

of 5 . The  same pattern as for the other three measures emerged: the smaller the window size, 

the better the true dyads could be distinguished from  the surrogate dyads.  Maximum lag  was 

not influential  on the discriminative ability, but the largest t -statistic was observed at almost 

twice the window size (5 sec). For the replication analysis, a similar pattern was observed 

(maximum t = 7.05; window size = 3 sec, maximum lag = 8.5 sec ) with a slightly wider range 

of t -statistics  (range:  - .16  to  7.05;  Figure S1d -S2d ).  In conclusion, we recommend using a small 

window size and a maximum lag that is two to three times the window size. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 16 

Figure 4.  Distribution of t -statistics of the comparison between the true and surrogate dyads for 

each physiological measure. A positive value indicates higher synchrony level in the true 

compared to the surrogate dyads. Each data point represents one parameter con figuration. For 

the analyses, data from the first baseline measure were used. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 17 

Figure 5.  Distribution of the t -statistics of comparison between the originate and surrogate dyads for all 

parameter configurations and each physiological measure. The color coding runs from the lowest (blue) 

to the highest (yellow) t -statistic. A positive t -statis tic indicates that the true dyads showed higher 

synchrony levels than the surrogate dyads. The more yellow, the better the discrimination between the 

true and surrogate dyads. Data from the first baseline measure were used. Notice that the scaling of the 

axes and the color coding are adjusted to each physiological measure to increase comparability between 

parameters. 

Change in synchrony 

Heartrate.  The largest absolute t -statistic was negative indicating that synchrony levels 

were higher during baseline compared to storytelling (see Figure 6a). The highest absolute t -

statistic of 4.86 was observed when the window size was set to 4 sec. Similar to th e first 

comparison analysis, smaller window sizes could discriminate the two conditions better than 

large window sizes (see Figure 7a).  Again , the maximum lag was less influential than the 

window size parameter, but the best outcome was observed  for the smallest maximum lag of 4 

sec. The absolute t -statistic steadily decreased with increasing maximum lags.  Replication 

analysis showed similar  results, with smaller window sizes showing the greatest discriminative 

power between the conditions (see Figure S3a -S4a). Specifically, the largest absolute t -statistic 

was again observed for a window size of 4 sec , with  only minor variation across maximum lags 

(optimal maximum lag = 7 sec) . Therefore, based on both analyses the conclusion is: if the aim 

is to  distinguish synchrony levels in heartrate responses between two (within -subject) 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 18 

conditions, the smaller the window size, the better. The maximum lag is less influential, but  its 

optimal value  should be equal to or twice the window size. 

Skin conductance level.  All t -statistics were negative indicating that the level of 

synchrony was higher during the baseline measures compared to during storytelling (see Figure 

6b). The highest absolute t -statistic of 4.37 was observed for a window size of 18 sec and a 

maximum  lag of 25 sec. Interestingly,  the  recurrent  pattern of smaller window sizes showing 

greater t -statistics was not evident (see Figure 7b).  Even though  there seemed to be a weak 

tendency for absolute t -statistics to become larger with larger window sizes  and  maximum lags, 

the pattern was rather weak. In addition, the difference between t -statistics was small  (range:  -

1.61 , -4.37 ). The replication analysis deviated substantially, with the largest absolute t -statistic 

observed for a window size of 5 sec and a maximum lag of 12 sec, and an even narrower  range 

(-.19 to  -2.56 ; Figure S3b -S4b).  Given  the lack of clear patterns in the parameter configuration 

space and considerable discrepancies in the results between the primary and replication 

analyses,  we cannot draw meaningful conclusions about the optimal parameter configuration 

for detecting changes in skin conductance synchrony .

Pupil size.  Parameter configurations strongly influenced the direction of results, with 

small window sizes and maximum lags yielding higher synchrony during storytelling, and large 

window sizes and maximum lags yielding higher synchrony during baseline (Figure 7c).  The 

largest positive t -statistic (1.72; window size = 3.5 sec, maximum lag = 3 sec) and largest 

absolute t -statistic (2.07; window size = 8.5 sec, maximum lag = 9 sec) pointed in opposite 

directions, a pattern that was replicated with identical o ptimal parameter values . Given the 

ambiguity across parameters,  we refrain from providing recommendations for this measure and 

instead caution that parameter choices can substantially alter the conclusions drawn about 

changes in pupil synchrony between conditions. 

Facial expressions.  All t -statistics were positive, indicating higher synchrony during 

storytelling than baseline  (Figure 6d) . The best discrimination was observed for the smallest 

window size (3 sec; t = 3.99), with a weak but consistent pattern of smaller window sizes 

yielding larger t -statistics (Figure 7d).  Albeit weak, the general pattern emerged with larger t -

statistics being associated with smaller windows sizes.  The maximum lag had negligible 

influence on the results , with the biggest difference bet ween conditions was 3.5 sec . The 

replication analysis confirmed this pattern (maximum t = 4.53; window size = 3 sec), with only 

minor variation across maximum lags  (Figure S3d -S4d). To conclude, if the aim is to detect 

change in synchrony between two conditions in facial synchrony, then the window size should 

be set to a small value. The effect of the maximum lag was negligible, however, to be consistent 

with the ot her measures, we recommend a maximum lag twice the window size. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 19 

Figure 6.  Distribution of t -statistics of the comparison between storytelling and baseline for each 

physiological measure. A positive value indicates higher synchrony levels during storytelling compared 

to baseline. Each data point represents one parameter configur ation. 

.CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 20 

Figure 7.  Distribution of t -statistics of the comparison between storytelling and baseline of all parameter 

configurations for each physiological measure. The color coding runs from the lowest (blue) to the 

highest (yellow) t -statistic. A positive t -statistic indic ates that the level of synchrony was higher during 

storytelling than during baseline. Analysis was based on data from both baseline measures and the first 

and third stories. Notice that the scaling of the axes and the color coding are adjusted to  each 

physiological measure to increase comparability between parameters. Also, the highest t -statistic was 

not always the highest absolute value with the latter value being discussed in the result section. However, 

the general idea of greater (absolute) t -statistics indicating better discrimination between the two 

conditions remains. 

# Discussion 

The fact that we synchronize with  each other’s emotional expressions and physiological 

states has intrigued researchers in many different disciplines.  The present study investigated 

optimal parameter configurations for Windowed Cross -Correlation (WCC) analysis applied to 

four physiological measures: heartrate, skin conductance level, pupil size, and  activity of the 

Zygomaticus Major  muscle (associated with smiling) . We evaluated parameter configurations 

on two criteria: the ability to distinguish synchrony from pseudosynchrony, and the sensitivity 

to detect changes in synchrony between conditions .

Regarding the first criterion, a consistent pattern emerged across all four physiological 

measures: smaller window sizes more effectively discriminated true from surrogate dyads ,

namely synchrony from pseudosynchrony.  With respect to the second parameter, the maximum 

lag was generally less influential and larger than the corresponding window size.  Crucially, this 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 21 

pattern was not specific to any particular signal but  may reflect  an intrinsic characteristic of 

how cross -correlations are calculated , a point we elaborate on below. 

Regarding the second criterion, results were less conclusive.  Here, we compared 

baseline measures where people looked at each other in silent with periods where participants 

engaged in storytelling.  While heartrate and facial expressions showed a weak tendency for 

smaller window sizes to better detect condition differences, no clear pattern emerged for skin 

conductance level, and pupil size results were highly sensitive to parameter choice , with small 

parameters favoring storytelling and large parameters fa voring baseline. Two explanations are 

possible : (1) the difference between the two conditions was negligible and that the sensitivity 

to detect such small differences was barely affected by the parameters; (2) there were 

differences between the two conditions, but the method was not sensitive to detec t them. In 

support of the first explanation, in two previous studies, we have used parameters included in 

the current analysis with which we were able to detect differences in within -subject conditions 

and coul d link it to interpersonal outcomes (Behrens et al., 2020; Prochazkova et al., 2019). 

The method therefore has been shown to be sensitive in other contexts. Yet, we refrain from 

address this using simulated data or more extreme experimental contrasts. 

Table 2 summarizes our parameter recommendations. In what follows, we discuss our 

findings in depth and integrate them with theoretical considerations, focusing on the criterion 

to distinguish synchrony form pseudosynchrony. 

Table 2 

Summary of recommendations per parameter of the WCC  analysis 

Parameter  Recommendation 

Window size  - Lower bound: large enough to capture meaningful information and 

variance within the signal of interest 

- Upper bound: the response duration of the signal of interest; 

assumption of stationarity is met 

Maximum lag  - Lower bound: at least as long as the window size 

- Upper bound: at most twice as long as the window size 

Window and lag 

increment 

- Lower bound: 1 datapoint 

- Upper bound: same as the window size / maximum lag 

- Balance computational time and resolution: 1 -5% of the window size 

/ maximum lag 

Window size 

We observed that a wide range of window sizes were able to distinguish between 

synchrony and  pseudo synchro ny, with a recurrent pattern across measures: s maller window 

sizes  generally  performed better , while excessively large window size turned the table  to the 

extent that the levels became lower for the true dyads than the surrogate dyads.  To understand 

this  general pattern , we should first  quickly  recap  the purpose of the surrogate data analysis. 

The ultimate  aim  of this analysis  is to destroy any synchrony that is the result of interpersonal 

processes while preserving all other statistical properties by generating new  pseudo  dyads that 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 22 

never actually interacted  during the study . This way we  kn ew  that the null hypothesis , i.e.,  there 

is no interpersonal synchrony between participants , would be  true ; and we expected it to be  true 

independent ly  of the parameter configurations . Hence, the  distribution of cross -correlations  for 

the surrogate dyads stayed  constant across all parameters. In contrast,  for the true dyads, 

synchrony  did  emerge, which we expected based on prior research. During a dynamic 

interaction,  however,  there are moments when  dyads are in sync, but also out of sync (Boker & 

Rotondo, 2002; Chen et al., 2020).  Th ese “anti -synchrony” moments  are also referred to as 

antiphase synchrony or antiphase linkage (Reed et al., 2013), and they are the key element to 

explain the patterns we observed: if  the window size  is  too large, both moments of synchrony 

and  anti -phase synchrony  are likely to be included into one window segment,  averaging out and 

substantially reducing the strength of synchrony. This  would result  in  synchrony estimates to 

invert, with surrogate dyads , likely lacking the synch -non -synch dynamics of a true interaction, 

appearing more synchronized than true d yads.  Following the same logic , a smaller  window 

size  reduces the variance , causing the overall synchrony level to increase. 

As  seen  in Equation 1 , the cross -correlation is calculated by dividing the distance 

between each datapoint and the mean of the window segment by its standard deviation : the 

smaller the window size, the less chance for variation to occur within a window (i.e., the smaller 

the standard deviation),  the higher the correlation . In this case , while the distribution of 

correlation estimates  stayed  constant for the surrogate dyads, the estimates for the true dyads 

increased, the  distance between the  means  of these  two groups  became  increasingly larger,  and 

the  general pattern we  observed across  measures  emerged . Thus, t his pattern  is not measure -

specific but rather reflects an  intrinsic  mathematical property of cross -correlation which applies 

to all time -series. 

One may wonder  whether steadily decreasing the window size will also steadily increase 

the ability to distinguish synchrony from pseudosynchrony. The short answer is no. Imagine 

the extreme case, where the window size consists of two  data points . These two datapoints hold 

very little information and would only allow for possible correlation values of  -1 and 1. This 

reduces the sensitivity for measuring synchrony and therefore for distinguishing synchrony 

from pseudosynchrony. Consequently, somewh ere between  a window size containing two 

datapoints and the smallest window sizes we examined, there will be a turning point, where the 

two types of dyads will become distinguishable. Although statistically possible, making the 

window size as small as possible (but a bove the turning point) is not advisable for two reasons: 

(1) a sufficient number of data points are needed to reliably estimate correlation coefficients 

(Schönbrodt & Perugini, 2013), and (2) the window should capture a meaningful response. As 

outlined ea rlier, in order to reliably estimate a correlation coefficient, 65 to 250  data points  are 

necessary , depending on the strength of the correlation. With a sampling rate of 20Hz across 

all measures, we therefore used a window size of at least 3 seconds (60 datapoints). If 

researchers want to further decrease the window size, they should increase their samp ling rate 

accordingly , whilst keeping in mind the biological plausibility of the signal investigated.  With 

that said, a window size must include responses  constrained  by a meaningful upper and lower 

bound. 

In the current study, we narrowed the possible values for the window size parameter by 

showing a range of parameters that qualify as potentially suitable. How can researchers choose 

between these options? To answer this question,  we  should  go back  to  why  cutting the time 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 23 

series into segments , i.e.,  reducing the non -stationarity in the signals , is relevant  in the first 

place . A stationary signal has constant statistical properties , including , among others,  a constant 

mean and standard deviation within that signal. In a dynamic interaction, the strength of 

synchrony will vary between moments of strong and weak synchrony. The window size needs 

to be small enough such that the synchrony level stays constant  within  that window. 

Determining how small the window must be, depends on the nature of the signal and is 

contained by an upper and lower bound.  Let’s make  some  concrete example s. Imagine two 

interaction partners  smiling at each other, with smiles  coded  in a bin ary fashion: a  person either 

smiles or  does  not.  Given an appropriate correlation measure for categorical variable s, if  the 

two participants smile at the same time for the same duration, there will be perfect synchrony 

between them for the entire duration of the two smiles . In this case, the window size could be 

as large as the duration of the smile because the level of synchrony is constant during that 

interval. However, if the smiling response occurs in a  dynamic interaction  and is continuously 

measured w ith  the activity of the  zygomaticus major  (as in the current study), there  will be 

variations in latency, magnitude , and duration of the smiles within and between individuals. In 

this case, the level of synchrony is likely to change even within the window that would have 

been categorized as a ‘smile’ in the  discrete  scenario described above : one  person might show 

a long, pronounced smile, while the other might smile later and for a shorter length of tim e, and 

synchrony would only occur during the short time  when  both people  simultaneously  smile .

Therefore,  if  a smile is detected  through facial muscle activity , the window size should be 

smaller than the duration of a “typical” smile to capture these variations , optimally at most  half 

the response duration . In this way, at least  two estimates of the level of synchrony will be 

computed for that response , capturing changes in synchrony that are twice the speed of the 

overall response. Other than the upper bound for window size being smaller than the response 

dura tion of interest, there is a lower bound as well. In particular, the window size should be 

large enough to capture meaningful variations within a response. For example, if the signal of 

interest is skin conductance level, a window size of 1 second would co ntain straight lines in 

most windows. This  would  produce  extreme cross -correlations without capturing meaningful 

changes in the signal. On the other hand, applying the same window size to facial expressions 

might be considered a medium to large  window , given that a smile has been shown to last 

500ms to 4 seconds (Frank et al., 1993). Both the upper and lower bound therefore , determine 

the potential values for the window size. 

We realize that defining the  “duration of a response”  in physiological signals is 

inherently difficult due to substantial variability within and between individuals.  It is beyond 

the scope of the current paper to provide concrete guidelines for this matter ; researchers must 

decide which aspects of the signal are theoretically relevant  for their research question and 

design.  The  appropriate  (range of) window size(s) likely  differ  across situations and conditions ,

and  should be  treated as a testable assumptio n, namely, that responses synchronize that are 

equal to or longer than the window size chosen.  Faster fluctuations may still be present but are 

likely attenuated through averaging. 

In the absence of strong a priori hypotheses, researchers may examine a limited range of 

window sizes to determine which timescales capture synchrony in a given context.  Comparing 

two to three potential values can shed light  on  the  temporal scale at which  synchrony occurs in 

a particular context. Of course,  because synchrony is  unlikely  to occur only at a single fixed 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 24 

duration , similar results  are to be expected  for window sizes closer together.  Consequently, 

referring , for instance,  to “skin conductance synchrony” based on a single parameter choice 

risks overgeneralization.  Our recommendation is to preregister the  parameter range  one intends 

to use and to report the distribution of correlation coefficients across these parameters. This 

approach  would make the parameter choice transparent while  strengthening  the interpretability 

of conclusions. 

To conclude, the results of the current study indicate that a range of window sizes  are 

able to detect synchrony that occurs as a result of interpersonal processes with a preference for 

shorter window sizes. From a theoretical perspective, the range of potential window sizes is 

contained by (i) an upper bound defined by the length of the dur ation of the responses under 

investigation and (ii) a lower bound defined by sufficient variation within the window. Rather 

than searching for that one most suitable par ameter for each physiological measure, choosing a 

window size should be seen as a hypothesis being tested. Importantly, researchers need to be 

specific about what aspect of a signal they investigate , which should be clearly stated in both 

their hypothesis and conclusions. 

Maximum lag and increments 

Our results revealed that the maximum lag was less influential than the window size, 

yet not trivial. In the Results section, we included recommendations on how to specify this 

parameter in relation to the window size. For three of the four measures , the optimal maximum 

lag was around twice the corresponding window size. For skin conductance level, this ratio 

increased to four times the window size. However, we would like to point out that the 

corresponding window size of 4 sec was very small. Conside ring t he slow time course of the 

measure, a larger window size is likely to be preferred , and we expect the  ratio  to  converge  with 

the one  recommended for the other measures. In Table 2, we set a maximum lag twice the 

window size as the upper limit , which means that there can be up to a full response between the 

responses of the interacting individuals. For example, imagine the measure of interest is facial 

activity , and the window size is 2 seconds : if  the maximum lag is 4 seconds, then two smiles 

that occur 4 s econds apart from each other are considered synchronized responses. This 

situation seems still reasonable in the context of a real conversation, yet on the upper limit. 

However, expanding the maximum lag to 6 seconds (a maximum lag three times the window 

size) would likely link two unrelated events to one another. The lower bound of setting the 

maximum lag equal to the window size corresponds to the situation where people respond to 

each other in direct succession. In sum, as a general rule of thumb , we rec ommend a maximum 

lag of at least equal to and at most twice the size of the window size.  We adjusted the increments 

such that the windows and lags moved by 10% of the window size and maximum lag, 

respectively. This was a choice of practicality, reducing the computational time in light of the 

huge number of analyses run while keeping the resolu tion sufficiently high. If researchers focus 

on specific parameters, we  speculate  that reducing the percentage to 1 to 5% offers a good 

balance between analysis sensit ivity and computational tim e. However, future research is 

needed to determine the optimal balance between sensitivity and computational time. 

Limitations 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 25 

There are a few limitations that we would like to  point out. First, in the current study ,

we concentrated on the window size and maximum lag parameters, while setting the window 

and lag increments to 10%. A systematic investigation of the effect of changing these 

parameters is needed. As mentioned earlier, estimations of the level of synchrony  will stabilize 

with smaller increments , such that decreasing the increments even further will add little 

information at the cost of extra computational time. Second, the guidelines we propose in Table 

2 may not be ge neralizable to other measures of synchrony and may not be applicable to other 

biological time series. Researchers should therefore be careful with making any inferences 

about other statistical analyses and time series  other  than  those  used in the current study. Third, 

all data come from a single study and  are  subject to method variation. To reduce such variation, 

we ran all analyses twice with different data from the same study. However, this does not 

address method variations that are the result of the stu dy itself , and future studies should 

replicate our findings in a different dataset. Furthermore, we changed the original plan for the 

comparison of time intervals as outlined in “Choice of comparisons” in the Supplementary 

Materials. A more tailored study design may  have found more specific results, in particular with 

regard to the sensitivity to detect change in synchrony. Related to that, WCC analysis only 

detects moments where the responses of two individuals move in the same direction (e.g., HR 

of both  participants increases). Given the turn -taking nature of a conversation (i.e., one person 

talks while the other is listening), responses moving in opposite directions (e.g., antiphase 

synchrony) can also give rise to valuable information of an interaction  as discussed by Reed et 

al. (2013) and Chen et al. (2020). This form of synchrony could be potentially captured with 

the WCC analysis by detecting the maximum  correlation based on the  absolute  values rather 

than only looking at the positive values. However , we do not recommend making this change 

without considerable validation first. Finally, WCC captures temporary  linear  relationships 

between two time series. Therefore, non -linear patterns or other causal effects not captured by 

a correlation are not detected by the current method. 

Future directions and conclusions 

The most important lesson the current study teaches us is that researchers need to be 

more precise in what they (aim to) investigate as defined by the parameters specified in the 

analyses. In the current study, dyads synchronized on a range of response win dows. However, 

this might not always be true, especially if the aim is to link it to specific psychological 

processes that might be influenced by only particular physiological processes. Future studies 

should therefore make  more refined distinctions of whi ch components of a particular 

physiological signal  are  involved in the process of interest and how the different components 

interact. This will facilitate making well -informed decisions about the response windows and 

shed more light  on  the biological underpinnings of psychological processes. 

Before making well -informed decisions on the parameter configurations  within  a

particular method, it is important to realize what the differences are  between  methods. WCC 

analysis is one of many possible methods , and each method has its strengths and weaknesses. 

While one method might be appropriate for  an experiment , it might not be for another ,

depending on, among others, the type of data (e.g., continuous or categorical measures ),  the 

measure of interest (e.g., strengths versus frequency of synchrony; global versus time -sensitive 

measure of synchrony) (Gates & Liu, 2016; Schoenherr et al., 2018) , and the specific tasks 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 26 

involved . For example, we chose to treat facial muscle activity as a continuous measure , but 

researchers might  also be interested in investigating  discrete  events of, for example, smiling 

and its synchrony in a conversation.  In this case , the analysis developed by Altmann (2011) ,

where time series are first categorized into intervals of synchrony and intervals of no synchrony 

before measures of the strength and frequency of synchrony are computed , may be more 

appropriate . In addition, even when  using the sa me data, the outcomes can be somewhat 

different:  Schoenherr  et al., (2018) performed  an exploratory factor analysis on seven linear 

time series analyses and different outcome variables , including  the WCC analysis . T hey 

reported that all these methods measure the overall phenomenon of synchrony, but could be 

categorized into three correlated, yet distinct facets of synchrony: the strength of synchrony of 

the total interaction, the strength of synchrony during synchron ization intervals, and the 

frequency of s ynchrony (Schoenherr et al., 2018). The WCC analysis as performed in the 

current study reflected the first facet. Researchers should therefore refine which facet of 

synchrony they are interested in and choose the appropriate methods accordingly. 

The aim of the current study was to optimize the parameters for the WCC analysis from 

a statistical point of view. The initial idea was to provide researchers with concrete guidelines 

on which specific parameters would be most appropriate for the four phys iological measures. 

However, the results show that when the aim is to detect synchrony, the parameters follow a 

general pattern that is not specific to the signal of interest, but rather a result of intrinsic 

characteristics of how the cross -correlation is  calculated. That does not mean that the 

parameters should not be tailored to the signal of interest. Instead, theoretical considerations 

should be integrated with the findings observed in the current study. Here, there is no one -fits -

all solution, which m ight not be surprising given that we aim to capture a highly complex 

dynamical  process. The current study narrows down the range of possible parameters , and we 

provide guidelines on how to tailor the parameters further to the  interests  of the researcher. 

Being specific and transparent about these choices will increase the comparability across studies 

and add more and more pieces to the puzzle of understanding the phenomenon of synchrony. 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 27 

Acknowledgments : We thank the students who have assisted in collecting the data for this 

study.  The work has been previously shared as a preprint: 

Behrens, Moulder, Boker & Kret (2020)  - Quantifying Physiological Synchrony through 

Windowed Cross -Correlation Analysis: Statistical and Theoretical Considerations  at this link 

https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 .

Funding : This research was supported by the Leiden University Fund / Mr.J.J. van Walsem 

Fonds W18205 -5-95 (to F.B.), and Netherlands Science Foundation 016.VIDI.185.036 (to 

M.E.K.) .

Author contributions : Conceptualization: F.B., R.G.M, M.E.K.; Data curation: F.B.; Formal 

analysis: F.B., R.G.M.; Investigation:  F.B., R.G.M.; Methodology: F.B., R.G.M, M.E.K.; 

Supervision: M.E.K, S.M.B; Visualization: F.B., R.G.M.; Writing  – original draft: F.B.; 

Writing  – review & editing: R.G.M., F.D., S.M.B., M.E.K.;  Competing interests : Authors 

declare no competing interests. 

Data and materials availability : All data, code, and materials that are associated with this 

paper and used to conduct the analyses  are available on the Open Science Framework at this 

link : https://osf.io/vxm5b/overview?view_only=93ac3e21966642968b260dcbc9c061f6 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 28 

References 

Altmann, U. (2011). Investigation of movement synchrony using windowed cross -lagged regression.  In  Analysis of verbal and 

nonverbal communication  (pp. 335 –345). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.  https://doi.org/10.1007/978 -3-642 -25775 -9

Altmann, U., Schoenherr, D., Paulick, J., Deisenhofer, A. K., Schwartz, B., Rubel, J. A., …  Strauss, B. (2020). Associations 

between movement synchrony and outcome in patients with social anxiety disorder: Evidence for treatment specific 

effects.  Psychotherapy Research, 30(5), 574 –590.  https://doi.org/10.1080/10503307.2019.1630779 

Altmann, U., Brümmel, M., Meier, J., & Strauss, B. (2021).  Movement Synchrony and Facial Synchrony as  Diagnostic Features 

of Depression: A Pilot Study. Journal of Nervous and Mental Disease, 209(2), 128 –136. 

https://doi.org/10.1097/NMD.0000000000001268 

Baer, R. A., Smith, G. T., Hopkins, J., Krietemeyer, J., & Toney, L. (2006). Using Self -Report Assessment Methods to Explore 

Facets of Mindfulness.  Assessment , 13 (1), 27 –45. https://doi.org/10.1177/1073191105283504 

Behrens, F., Snijdewint, J. A., Moulder, R. G., Prochazkova, E., Sjak -Shie, E. E., Boker, S. M., & Kret, M. E. (2020). 

Physiological synchrony is associated with cooperative success in real ‑ life interactions.  Scientific Reports , 10 , 1 –9. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598 -020 -76539 -8

Boker, S. M., & Rotondo, J. L. (2002). Symmetry building and symmetry breaking in synchronized movement.  Mirror Neurons 

and the Evolution of Brain and Language , 42 , 163 –171. https://doi.org/10.1075/aicr.42.14bok 

Boker, S. M., Xu, M., Rotondo, J. L., & King, K. (2002). Windowed cross -correlation and peak picking for the analysis of 

variability in the association between behavioral time series.  Psychological Methods , 7(3), 338 –355. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/1082 -989X.7.3.338 

Cappella, J. (1996). Dynamic coordination of vocal and kinesic behavior in dyadic interaction: Methods, problems, and 

interpersonal outcomes. In  Dynamic patterns in communication processes  (pp. 353 –386). Thousand Oaks, CA, US: 

Sage. 

Chartrand, T. L., & Bargh, J. A. (1999). The chameleon effect: The perception -behavior link and social interaction.  Journal of 

Personality and Social Psychology , 76 (6), 893 –910. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -3514.76.6.893 

Chen, K., Brown, C. L., Wells, J. L., Rothwell, E. S., Otero, M. C., Levenson, R. W., & Fredrickson, B. L. (2020). Physiologi cal 

Linkage During Shared Positive and Shared Negative Emotion.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology .

https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1037/pspi0000337 

Davis, M. (1980). A multidimensional approach to individual differences in empathy.  JSAS Catalog of Selected Documents in 

Psychology , 10 . https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -3514.44.1.113 

Diana, F., Folz, J., Sjak -Shie, E., Hortensius, R., & Kret, M. E. (2025). Physiological Synchrony Predicts Reduced Reciprocity 

in Human Face -to -Face Interactions.  PsyArXiv. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.31234/osf.io/n85t3_v2 

Diana, F., Juárez -mora, O. E., Boekel, W., Hortensius, R., & Kret, M. E. (2023).  How video calls affect mimicry and trust 

during interactions. Phil.  Trans. R. Soc. B, 378, 1 –11. https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1098/rstb.2021.0484 

Diana, F., & Kret, M. (2025). First predict, then bond: Rethinking the function of mimicry from prediction to affiliation in 

human and non -human animals. Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews, 168(June 2024), 105950. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.20 24.105950 

de Klerk, C. C. J. M., Hamilton, A. F. d. C., & Southgate, V. (2018). Eye contact modulates facial mimicry in 4 -month -old 

infants: An EMG and fNIRS study.  Cortex , 106 , 93 –103. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2018.05.002 

Feldman, R., Magori -Cohen, R., Galili , G., Singer, M., & Louzoun, Y. (2011).  Mother and infant coordinate heart rhythms 

through episodes of interaction synchrony.  Infant Behavior and Development , 34 (4), 569 –577. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infbeh.2011.06.008 

Frank, M. G., Ekman, P., & Friesen, W. V. (1993). Behavioral Markers and Recognizability of the Smile of Enjoyment.  Journal 

of Personality and Social Psychology , 64 (1), 83 –93. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -3514.64.1.83 

Galazka, M. A., Åsberg Johnels, J., Zürcher, N. R., Hippolyte, L., Lemonnier, E., Billstedt, E., Gillberg, C., & Hadjikhani,  N. 

(2019). Pupillary Contagion in Autism.  Psychological Science , 30 (2), 309 –315. 

https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797618809382 

Gates, K. M., & Liu, S. (2016). Methods for Quantifying Patterns of Dynamic Interactions in Dyads.  Assessment , 23 (4), 459 –

471. https://doi.org/10.1177/1073191116641508 

Hasson, U., Nir, Y., Levy, I., Fuhrmann, G., & Malach, R. (2004). Intersubject synchronization of cortical activity during 

natural vision.  Science , 303 , 1634 –1640. https://doi.org/10.1126/science.1089506 

Kang, O., & Wheatley, T. (2015). Pupil dilation patterns reflect the contents of consciousness.  Consciousness and Cognition ,

35 (May 2015), 128 –135. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2015.05.001 

Kang, O., & Wheatley, T. (2017). Pupil dilation patterns spontaneously synchronize across individuals during shared attention .

Journal of Experimental Psychology: General , 146 (4), 569 –576. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000271 

Kret, M. E., & De Dreu, C. K. W. (2017). Pupil -mimicry conditions trust in partners: Moderation by oxytocin and group 

membership.  Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences , 284 (1850), 1–10. 

https://doi.org/10.1098/rspb.2016.2554 

Kret, M. E., Fischer, A. H., & De Dreu, C. K. W. (2015). Pupil Mimicry Correlates With Trust in In -Group Partners With 

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 29 

Dilating Pupils.  Psychological Science , 26 (9), 1401 –1410. https://doi.org/10.1177/0956797615588306 

Kret, M. E., Tomonaga, M., & Matsuzawa, T. (2014).  Chimpanzees and Humans Mimic Pupil -Size of Conspecifics.  PLoS 

ONE , 9(8), e104886. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0104886 

Levenson, R. W., & Gottman, J. M. (1983). Marital Interaction - PhysiologicalLinkage and Affective Exchange.  Journal of 

Personality and Social Psychology , 45 (3), 587 –597. 

Mancini, G., Ferrari, P. F., & Palagi, E. (2013). Rapid facial mimicry in geladas.  Scientific Reports , 3, 1–6. 

https://doi.org/10.1038/srep01527 

McAssey, M. P., Helm, J., Hsieh, F., Sbarra, D. A., & Ferrer, E. (2013). Methodological advances for detecting physiological 

synchrony during dyadic interactions.  Methodology , 9(2), 41 –53. https://doi.org/10.1027/1614 -2241/a000053 

Moulder, R. G., Boker, S. M., Ramseyer, F., & Tschacher, W. (2018). Determining synchrony between behavioral time series: 

An application of surrogate data generation for establishing falsifiable null -hypotheses.  Psychological Methods , 23 (4), 

757 –773. https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000172 

Palagi, E., Leone, A., Mancini, G., & Ferrari, P. F. (2009). Contagious yawning in gelada baboons as a possible expression of 

empathy.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 106 (46), 19262 –19267. 

https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.0910891106 

Palumbo, R. V., Marraccini, M. E., Weyandt, L. L., Wilder -Smith, O., McGee, H. A., Liu, S., & Goodwin, M. S. (2017). 

Interpersonal autonomic physiology: A systematic review of the literature.  Personality and Social Psychology Review ,

21 (2), 99 –141. https://doi.org/10.1177/1088868316628405 

Prochazkova, E., & Kret, M. E. (2017). Connecting minds and sharing emotions through mimicry: A neurocognitive model of 

emotional contagion.  Neuroscience and Biobehavioral Reviews , 80 (April), 99 –114. 

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.05.013 

Prochazkova, E., Prochazkova, L., Giffin, M. R., Scholte, H. S., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Kret, M. E. (2018).  Pupil mimicry 

promotes trust through the theory -of -mind network.  Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences , 115 (31), E7265 –

E7274. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1803916115 

Prochazkova, E., Sjak -Shie, E. E., Behrens, F., Lindh, D., & Kret, M. E. (2019).  The choreography of human attraction : 

physiological synchrony in a blind date setting.  BioRxiv , 1 –33. https://doi.org/http://dx.doi.org/10.1101/748707 

Ramseyer, F., & Tschacher, W. (2011).  Nonverbal synchrony in psychotherapy: Coordinated body movement reflects 

relationship quality and outcome.  Journal of Consulting and Clinical Psychology , 79 (3), 284 –295. 

https://doi.org/10.1037/a0023419 

Reed, R., Randall, A., Post, J., & Butler, E. (2013). Partner influence and in -phase versus anti -phase physiological linkage in 

romantic couples.  International Journal of Psychophysiology , 88 , 309 –316. 

https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0167876012005818 

Riehle, M., Kempkensteffen, J., & Lincoln, T. M. (2017). Quantifying Facial Expression Synchrony in Face -To -Face Dyadic 

Interactions: Temporal Dynamics of Simultaneously Recorded Facial EMG Signals. Journal of Nonverbal Behavior, 

41(2), 85 –102. https://doi .org/10.1007/s10919 -016 -0246 -8

Robinson, J. W., Herman, A., & Kaplan, B. J. (1982). Autonomic responses correlate with counselor -client empathy.  Journal 

of Counseling Psychology , 29 (2), 195 –198. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -0167.29.2.195 

Schoeneberger, J. A. (2016). The Impact of Sample Size and Other Factors When Estimating Multilevel Logistic Models. 

Journal of Experimental Education , 84 (2), 373 –397. https://doi.org/10.1080/00220973.2015.1027805 

Schoenherr, D., Paulick, J., Worrack, S., Strauss , B. M., Rubel, J. A., Schwartz, B., Deisenhofer, A. K., Lutz, W., Stangier, U., 

& Altmann, U. (2018).  Quantification of nonverbal synchrony using linear time series analysis methods: Lack of 

convergent validity and evidence for facets of synchrony.  Behavior Research Methods , 51 (1), 361 –383. 

https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428 -018 -1139 -z

Schönbrodt, F. D., & Perugini, M. (2013). At what sample size do correlations stabilize?  Journal of Research in Personality ,

47 (5), 609 –612.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jrp.2013.05.009 

Schut, C., Grossman, S., Gieler, U., Kupfer, J., & Yosipovitch, G. (2015).  Contagious itch: What we know and what we would 

like to know. Frontiers in Human Neuroscience, 9(FEB), 1 –6. https://doi.org/10.3389/fnhum.2015.00057 

Shih, E. W., Quiñones -Camacho, L. E., Karan, A., & Davis, E. L. (2019). Physiological contagion in parent –child dyads during 

an emotional challenge.  Social Development , December 2018 , 1 –17. https://doi.org/10.1111/sode.12359 

Smith, D., Schlaepfer, P., Major, K., Dyble, M., Page, A. E., Thompson, J., Chaudhary, N., Salali, G. D., MacE, R., Astete, L ., 

Ngales , M., Vinicius, L., & Migliano, A. B. (2017). Cooperation and the evolution of hunter -gatherer storytelling.  Nature 

Communications , 8(1). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467 -017 -02036 -8

Tarr, B., Launay, J., & Dunbar, R. I. M. (2016).  Silent disco: dancing in synchrony leads to elevated pain thresholds and social 

closeness.  Evolution and Human Behavior , 37 (5), 343 –349.  https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2016.02.004 

Tia, B., Saimpont, A., Paizis, C., Mourey, F., Fadiga, L., & Pozzo, T. (2011). Does observation of postural imbalance induce 

a postural reaction? PLoS ONE, 6(3). https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0017799 

Thorson, K. R., West, T. V., & Mendes, W. B. (2017). Measuring Physiological Influence in Dyads: A Guide to Designing, 

Implementing, and Analyzing Dyadic Physiological Studies.  Psychological Methods .

> .CC-BY-NC-ND 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted July 17, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.1101/2020.08.27.269746 doi: bioRxiv preprint

QUANTIFYING PHYSIOLOGICAL SYNCHRONY 30 

https://doi.org/10.1037/met0000166 

Watson, D., Clark, L. A., & Tellegen, A. (1988). Development and validation of brief measures of positive and negative affect :

The PANAS scales.  Journal of Personality and Social Psychology , 54 (6), 1063 –1070. https://doi.org/10.1037/0022 -

3514.54.6.1063 

Wehebrink, K. S., Koelkebeck, K., Piest, S., De Dreu, C. K. W., & Kret, M. E. (2018). Pupil mimicry and trust –Implication 

for depression.  Journal of Psychiatric Research , 97 , 70 –76. 

https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jpsychires.2017.11.007