Title: Tired and wired: sleep deprivation prevents emotional adaptation to prolonged and ambiguous threat

URL Source: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648v1.full.pdf

Number of Pages: 27

Markdown Content:
1

# Tired and wired: sleep deprivation prevents emotional 

# adaptation to prolonged and ambiguous threat 

Emma C. Sullivan a,b , Cade McCall a, Maximilian Croissant c, Lisa -Marie Henderson a,

Guy Schofield d & Scott A. Cairney a

a.  Department of Psychology, University of York, York, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom. 

b.  Melbourne School of Psychological Sciences, University of Melbourne, Melbourne, VIC 

3010, Australia. 

c.  Department of Computer Science, University of York, York, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom. 

d.  Department of Archaeology , University of York, York, YO10 5DD, United Kingdom. 

Corresponding author: Scott A. Cairney, Department of Psychology, University of York, York, 

YO10 5DD, United Kingdom. Email: scott.cairney@york.ac.uk .

Classification: Social Sciences; Psychological and Cognitive Sciences 

Keywords: Sleep deprivation, emotional arousal , ambiguous threat, virtual reality, heart rate 

variability 

This not this manuscript has not yet been peer reviewed. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 2

Abstract 

Sleep deprivation amplifies emotional reactivity to brief , overt threats in the external 

environment. However, its effects on emotional responses to prolonged, ambiguous threat 

remain unclear. In this pre -registered study, we combined virtual reality, psychophysiology and 

multidimensional experience sampling to test the hypothesis that sleep deprivation disrupts 

emotional adaptation to sustained or resolving threat. Following a night of restful sleep or 

total sleep deprivation, healthy young adults navigated an immersive virtual world that 

alternated between ambiguously threatening and non -threatening contexts . Despite initial 

increases in emotional arousal , sleep -rested individuals quickly downregulated affective 

responses to ambiguous threat , reflecting efficient adaptation to the aversive virtual 

environment. Sleep -deprived individuals, by contrast, were unable to overturn elevated 

arousal responses, and exhibited a breakdown of goal -orientated, emotional control .

Interestingly, resting heart rate variability, an index of affective regulat ory capacity , mitigated 

arousal responses to ambiguous threat after sleep deprivation. These findings suggest that 

insufficient sleep prevents an adaptive renormalisation of emotional arousal during prolonged 

and ambiguous threat, giving rise to a maladaptive state of anxiety. 

Significance statement 

Sleep problems are strongly linked to anxiety, but the psychological mechanisms underpinning 

this relationship are poorly understood . Using an immersive virtual world to model persistent 

uncertainty and danger , we show that a single night of sleep deprivation prevents healthy 

young adults from downregulating arousal responses to sustained, ambiguous threat, leaving 

them in a heightened state of anxiety. Interestingly , higher levels of heart rate variability at 

rest, an index of flexible emotional control, mitigated the anxiogenic impact of sleep 

deprivation. Together, t hese findings identify a novel pathway through which insufficient sleep 

may amplify anxiety and reveal a prospective physiological marker of resi lience. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 3

Main 

Sleep problems are robustly linked to anxiety. A recent meta -analysis of 5,875 patients showed 

that sleep disturbances are highly prevalent in generalised anxiety disorder (1) . Relatedly , a 

longitudinal study of 19,273 patients with insomnia revealed an 8.8 -fold risk of developing 

anxiety, as compared to matched controls without insomnia (2) . In healthy adults, a single 

night of experimental sleep deprivation drastically increased self -reported anxiety scores, with 

a large proportion of these sleep -deprived individuals temporarily exceeding the clinical 

threshold (3) . Given the growing global burden of anxiety (4) , understanding the affective and 

cognitive mechanisms underpinning the anxiogenic impacts of sleep deprivation is essential 

for developing targeted treatments and mitigation strategies. 

One pathway through which sleep problems likely contribute to anxiety is via 

disruption of the brain’s threat processing networks. In healthy adults, a single night of sleep 

deprivation amplifies autonomic arousal responses to emotionally negative images (5) .

Similarly, functional neuroimaging studies have revealed a breakdown of top -down emotional 

control of amygdala by prefrontal cortex in sleep -deprived healthy adults exposed to aversive 

images and videos (3, 6) ; a brain activity profile that closely resembles that of clinically anxious 

individuals engaging in negative emotion processing (7 –9) . Moreover, sleep deprivation 

impairs reciprocal associations between central and peripheral emotion -signalling systems, 

disrupting accurate discrimination of threatening from non -threatening faces (10) .

While these and other studies have provided important insights into the impact of 

sleep deprivation on emotional responses to threat, they have focused only on discrete and 

unambiguous events at fixed points in time (e.g., static images or short videos lasting only a 

few seconds ). In real -world context s, by contrast, the nature of threats can be uncertain even 

when an individual is aware of being at risk (11) . Potential dangers are often more ambiguous 

and protracted than stimuli presented in laboratory settings , unfolding over several minutes 

and interspersed with periods of relative safety. Affective responses to prolonged and 

ambiguous threat can thus be adapted to the particular features of an experience and the 

familiarity that an individual has with their surroundings (12, 13) . Determining how 

insufficient sleep influences emotional adaptation to sustained or resolving threat is therefore 

central to understanding how sleep problems give rise to anxiety. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 4

We addressed this question in the current pre -registered study (osf.io/g4fte ),

combining virtual reality, psychophysiology and multi -dimensional experience sampling in 

N=54 healthy young adults. Participants underwent a night of restful sleep (with 

polysomnography) or total sleep deprivation before navigating an immersive virtual world that 

alternated between blocks of ambiguously threatening and non -threatening contexts (Fig 1 ).

The ambiguously threatening contexts comprised dark, unsettling scenarios (e.g., an 

abandoned hospital ward) that were designed to evoke a sustained state of hypervigilance 

and anxiety , rather than the phasic arousal responses elicited by brief, unambiguous threats 

(11) . The non -threatening contexts consisted of well -lit and peaceful office spaces. Skin 

conductance level (SCL) and heart rate (beats -per -minute, BPM) were monitored throughout 

the virtual experience to serve as real -time physiological indices of emotional arousal . Self -

reported feelings of arousal were acquired retrospectively in a playback task. A video 

demonstration of the virtual world is available online ( https://youtu.be/zm6pLPliZv0 ). 

We tested two hypotheses concerning the impact of sleep deprivation on emotional 

adaptation to prolonged, ambiguous threat . Our first hypothesis was that sleep loss would 

amplify emotional arousal responses during the ambiguously threatening blocks of the virtual 

world. Our second hypothesis was that sleep loss would slow the resolution of emotional 

arousal following transitions into non -threatening blocks of the virtual world, consistent with 

a failure to downregulate emotional affect once the potential d anger has expired. 

Given these proposed negative impacts of sleep deprivation , a converse question 

concerns the neurobiological mechanisms through which restful sleep prevents maladaptive 

emotional responding to evolving threats . Non -rapid eye movement slow -wave sleep and 

associated slow -wave activity (SWA, ~0.5 -4.0 Hz) have been implicated in anxiety regulation 

via the restoration of prefrontal emotional control networks (3) . This aligns with disruptions 

to slow -wave sleep and SWA observed in patients with generalised anxiety disorder , post -

traumatic stress disorder and insomnia, as well as subclinical populations with high trait 

anxiety (14 –17) . Accordingly, we further hypothesised that SWA during restful sleep would 

support emotional adaptation to evolving, ambiguous threat. 

Successfully adapting emotional responses to changes in the external environment 

relies on flexible, goal -orientated cognition and the regulation of perseverative thoughts. 

Recent work has shown that sleep deprivation gives rise to intrusive, uncontrollable thoughts 

via a breakdown of prefrontal control and aberrant connectivity between brain networks 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

5

supporting internally and externally focused mental processing (18) . This raises the question 

of whether failures of emotional adaptation after sleep loss reflect disruptions of goal -

orientated cognition and affective control , giving way to the repetitive and maladaptive 

thought patterns that reinforce anxiety. To explore this possibility, we had participants report 

on the content of their ongoing thoughts at rest and examined changes in latent thought 

patterns across restful sleep and sleep deprivation. 

Finally, given sleep disturbance is a core feature of generalized anxiety disorder (19 –

21) , identifying targets that could offset the negative impact of sleep loss on emotion 

regulation is essential for advancing treatment and mitigation efforts. Resting heart rate 

variability (HRV; the moment -to -moment variation between heartbeats) has been li nked to 

flexible emotion processing (22) and cognitive control (23, 24) . In earlier work, higher resting 

HRV was associated with improved regulation of emotional arousal in threatening virtual 

environments (25) and may support affective adaptation when sleep loss compromises 

regulatory capacity. We obtained resting heart rate recording s from each of our participants 

to explore this possibility. 

We found that sleep deprivation amplified early arousal responses and prevented 

emotional adaptation to prolonged, ambiguous threat . However, the affective benefits of 

restful sleep were unrelated to SWA. Interestingly, emotional adaptation was better preserved 

in sleep -deprived participants with higher levels of resting HRV, suggesting that HRV may 

buffer the anxiogenic impacts of insufficient sleep. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

6

Results 

Fig 1. Experimental procedure and virtual world . A) Participants completed the State -Trait Anxiety 

Inventory —State Version (STAI -S), estimated the extent to which their ongoing thoughts matched a 

series of thought probes (Multidimensional Experience Sampling; MDES) and completed a 5-min 

resting heart rate recording before and after a night of restful sleep or sleep deprivation. Sleep was 

monitored with polysomnography (PSG) , permitting a reliable assessment of slow -wave activity during 

non -rapid eye movement sleep . In the morning, p articipants entered an imm ersive virtual world while 

their skin conductance level and heart rate were monitored. Afterwards, they watched a replay of their 

virtual experience and retrospectively rated their feelings of emotional arousal (using a joystick). B) 

The virtual world alternated between blocks of ambiguously threatening (e.g., a storage room 

containing hazardous chemicals, top ) and non -threatening scenarios (e.g., an office , bottom ). There 

were two threatening and two non -threatening blocks in total, each lasting ~2 min . Participants began 

in a well -lit office room that served as a non -threatening baseline. 

Sleep deprivation escalates anxiety 

To confirm that sleep deprivation elevate d self -reported feelings of anxiety, we first examined 

overnight changes on the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory —State Version (STAI -S; 26 , Fig 1A ).

Whereas STAI -S scores decreased from evening to morning in sleep -rested individuals (t = 

2.74, p = .011, d = 0.53), they increased markedly in sleep -deprived individuals (t = 6.25, p <

.001, d = 1.20; F(1, 52) = 45.28, p < .001, ɳρ2 = 0.47 ; Fig 2A ). Notably , in the morning after sleep 

deprivation, 56% of participants (N= 15 ) exceed ed the STAI -S threshold for clinically significant 

anxiety , whereas only 7% (N=2) participants surpassed this threshold following restful sleep .

No significant between -group difference was observed at the evening baseline session (t = 

0.27, p = .788, d = 0.07). These findings replicate previous work demonstrating that a single 

night of sleep deprivation leads to a n elevated state of anxiety (3, 27) .

Alertness levels were reduced after sleep deprivation relative to restful sleep, as 

indicated by the Stanford Sleepiness Scale (28 , t = 8.16, p < .001, d = 2.22 ) and psychomotor 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 7

vigilance task (29 , t = 2.58, p = .013, d = 0.70 ). Extended alertness data are available in 

Supplementary Table 1 .

Sleep loss prevents emotional adaptation to ambiguous threat 

We then turned to the impact s of sleep deprivation on emotional adaptation to prolonged 

and ambiguous threat . To determine whether sleep loss amplifie d emotional responses to 

ambiguous threat , we assessed arousal levels during the first and second threatening blocks 

of the virtual world ( Fig 1B ). SCLs increased relative to baseline across all participants during 

the first threatening block (F(1,52) = 24.75, p < .001, ɳρ2 = 0.32) . Importantly , whereas SCLs 

decreased during the second threatening block in sleep -rested participants (t = 5.58, p < .001, 

d = 1.07) , they remained elevated in sleep -deprived participants (t = 1.80, p = .084, d = 0.35 ,

F(1,52) = 4.98, p = .030, ɳρ2 = 0.09 ; Fig 2B ), suggesting that sleep loss prevented a recalibration 

of emotional responses to sustained ambiguous threat. SCLs did not differ significantly 

between groups when averaged across blocks (F(1,52) = 3.95, p = .052, ɳρ2 = 0.07). Parallel 

analyses of heart rate (BPM) and self -reported feelings of arousal (assessed retrospectively 

via a playback task) did not reveal significant differences between groups (see Supplementary 

Table 2 ).

To establish whether sleep deprivation obstruct ed the resolution of emotional 

reactivity once the ambiguous threat ha d dissipated, we assessed changes in arousal between 

the threatening and non -threatening blocks of the virtual world. Across all participants, SCLs 

decreased following transitions into non -threatening blocks, with a larger decrease observed 

during the first than the second transition (F(1,52) = 7.83, p = .007, ɳρ2 = 0.13) . However, sleep 

deprivation had no significant impact on the magnitude of this change (Group : F(1,52) = 0.72, 

p = .400, ɳρ2 = 0.01 , Group*Block : F(1,52) = 2.98, p = .090, ɳρ2 = 0.05 ). Again, no significant 

between -group differences were observed in parallel analyses of heart rate and self -reported 

feelings of arousal (see Supplementary Table 3 ). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

8

Fig 2. Sleep deprivation impairs emotional adaptation to ambiguous threat . A) State anxiety 

decreased overnight in sleep -rested individuals but increased markedly overnight in sleep -deprived 

individuals (based on the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory – State Version ; STAI -S) . B) Skin conductance 

levels (SCLs) decreased between the first and second threatening blocks of the virtual world in sleep -

rested individuals but remained elevated in sleep -deprived individuals. Violin plots: t he width of the 

shaded area represents the proportion of data located there. Boxplots depict the minimum, first 

quartile, median, third quartile, and maximum values. Individual data points are marked in grey. ** p 

< .001, * p < .05. 

Emotional adap tation is not associated with slow -wave activity 

We next investigated whether SWA ( 0.8 –4.6 Hz) during non -rapid eye movement sleep 

support ed emotional adaptation to prolonged, ambiguous threat . No significant correlations 

were observed between SWA and either overnight reductions in state anxiety ( STAI -S: r = .09, 

p = 1.00 ) or the attenuation of SCLs between the first and second blocks of ambiguous threat 

(r = −.08, p = 1.00 ). Correlations between SWA and our other measures of emotional arousal 

were also not significant (see Supplementary Table 4 ).

Lack of sleep disrupts goal -orientated cognition 

We then explored whether maladaptive emotional responding after sleep deprivation was 

accompanied by a breakdown of the top -down control processes required to regulate 

emotions effectively. We used multidimensional experience sampling (MDES) —an established 

thought sampling technique (30 –34) where individuals rate the extent to which their ongoing 

thoughts correspond to a set of thought probes (e.g., my thoughts involved future events ; see 

Supplementa ry Table 5 for the full set of probes) —in the evening before restful sleep or sleep 

deprivation, and again in the morning . Principal components analysis was then applied to the 

MDES data to identify latent dimensions of thought that capture shared variance. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

9

The first identified component captured a goal orientated dimension corresponding to 

deliberate future problem solving. Interestingly, while there was no significant between -group 

difference in goal orientated thinking at the evening session (t = 0. 72 , p = .4 74, d = 0.23 ), one 

did emerge the following morning, with sleep deprived participants engaging in fewer goal -

orientated thoughts than the sleep -rested participants (t = 2. 66 , p = .0 12, d = 0.85 ; F(1,38) = 

4.07 , p = .05 1, ɳρ2 = 0. 10 ; Fig 3A ). Sleep deprivation also resulted in significantly less goal -

orientated thinking overall (F(1, 38) = 4. 88 , p = .03 3, ɳρ2 = 0.1 1). The general difference 

between sessions was not significant (F(1, 38) = 1. 22 , p = . 276 , ɳρ2 = 0.03 ). 

The second component captured a perseverative dimension corresponding to 

intrusive and negative thoughts. Although overnight changes in perseverative thinking 

significantly differed between the sleep -rested and sleep -deprived participants (F(1,38) = 

4.77 , p = .0 35 , ɳρ2 = 0.1 1), direct comparisons between these groups did not reach significance 

at the evening (t = 1. 17 , p = . 251 , d = 0.37 ) or morning sessions (t = -1. 53 , p = . 135 , d = 0.49 ;

Fig 3 B). No significant overall difference emerged between groups (F(1, 38) < 0.01 , p = . 943 ,

ɳρ2 < 0.01) or sessions (F(1,38) = 0.0 5, p = . 830 , ɳρ2 < 0.01) . See Supplementary Figure 1 for 

analysis of the other components .

Fig 3. Sleep deprivation disrupts top -down control . Principal components analysis of 

multidimensional experience -sampling data was used to identify latent patterns of thought by 

grouping thought probes that capture shared variance . A) The first component corresponded to a 

pattern of goal -orientated thinking . Component loadings are presented as a word cloud, where the 

word size reflect s loading magnitude and colour indicates direction of the relationship (red: positive, 

blue: negative). Sleep deprived participants reported fewer goal -orientated thoughts than the sleep -

rested participants in the morning session, but not in the evening session . B) The second component 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

10 

reflected a perseverative dimension of thought. Perseverative thinking increased after sleep 

deprivation compared to restful sleep, although this difference did not reach statistical significance . *

p < .05. 

Heart rate variability mitigates affect dysregulation after sleep loss 

Finally, we explored whether the negative impact of sleep deprivation on emotional 

adaptation wa s mitigated by higher levels of heart rate variability (HR V) at rest (based on a 5 -

min resting HR recording acquired in the evening before restful sleep or sleep deprivation) , a 

putative index of flexible emotion regulation and inhibitory control (22 –25) .

Participants with low HRV (based on a median split) had significantly higher self -

reported levels of arousal during the ambiguously threatening blocks of the virtual world after 

sleep deprivation than restful sleep (t = -4.83, p < .001 , d = 1.34 ). Contrastingly, no significant 

difference emerged in the high HRV group (t = 1.22 , p = . 228 , d= 0.34 ; F(1, 50) = 6.15 , p = . 017 ,

ɳρ2 = 0. 11 ; Fig 4 ). The mitigating impact of HRV on the maladaptive influences of sleep 

deprivation did not significantly differ between blocks ( F(1, 50) = 0.01 , p = . 937 , ɳρ2 < .01) and 

overall levels of self -reported arousal did not significantly differ between HRV groups (F(1, 50) 

= 0. 00 , p = . 974 , ɳρ2 < .01 ; HRV *Block : F(1, 50) = 0.05 , p = . 824 , ɳρ2 < .01 ).

The same analysis of SCL data did not produce any significant effects , suggesting that 

the protective effect of high HRV is express ed at the level of subjective experience, rather than 

in psychophysiological indices of arousal, consistent with our prior work (25) .

Fig 4. Heart rate variability mitigates the negative effect of sleep deprivation on emotional 

adaptation . Across both ambiguously threatening blocks of the virtual world , s elf -reported arousal 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 11

was significantly highe r following sleep deprivation compared to restful sleep in participants with low 

HRV, but not high HRV (root mean square of successive differences) ** p < .001 .

Discussion 

We combined immersive virtual reality, psychophysiology, and multidimensional experience 

sampling in healthy young adults to examine how sleep deprivation affects emotional 

adaptation to sustained or resolving threat . Whereas sleep -rested individuals rapidly 

acclimatised to ambiguously threatening contexts, sleep -deprived individuals showed 

persistently elevated arousal responses to prolonged , ambiguous threat . However, changes in 

emotional arousal were comparable across the sleep -rested and sleep -deprived conditions 

when participants mov ed from threatening to non -threatening context s. Sleep deprivation 

also decreased goal -orientated patterns of thought, consistent with a breakdown of top -down 

cognitive control. Interestingly, e motional adaptation was better preserved in sleep -deprived 

participants with higher resting heart rate variability (H RV), suggesting a moderating influence 

of HRV on the anxiogenic impacts of sleep loss. Together, these findings shed new light on the 

affective and cognitive pathways through which an absence of sleep gives rise to maladaptive 

patterns of emotional arousal and anxiety. 

Before examining the impact of sleep deprivation on emotion adaptation in the 

context of an immersive virtual world, we first assessed whether a night of sleep deprivation 

altered participants’ general state of anxiety, as measured by the State -Trait Anxiety 

Inventory —State Version (STAI -S). Sleep -deprived participants exhibited a significant 

overnight increase in state anxiety, with 56% exceeding the STAI’s clinical threshold during the 

morning session (none of whom had done so prior to the overnight interval). In contrast, 

sleep -rested participants showed a significant reduction in state anxiety from evening to 

morning, with only 7% exceeding the clinical threshold. These findings replicate previous work 

in healthy young adults (3, 27) and are consistent with the high comorbidity between sleep 

disturbances and anxiety disorders in the general population (1, 2, 35) .

Having established a generalised increase in state anxiety after sleep deprivation, we 

asked whether an absence of sleep impaired emotional adaptation to prolonged, ambiguous 

threat. Consistent with this view , elevated arousal responses ( based on SCLs) persisted across 

the first and second blocks of ambiguous threat in the sleep deprivation condition but 

dissipated across blocks in the sleep rested condition. This suggests that sleep deprivation 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 12

prevents the emotional brain from acclimatising to protracted and ambiguous threat , giving 

rise to an elevated state of anxiety. 

It is worth noting that analogous effects were not observed in our heart rate or self -

report data . This potentially reflects the greater specificity of SCL to changes in sympathetic 

arousal, relative to the integrated sympathetic and parasympathetic influences that shape 

heart rate fluctuations (36, 37) . Furthermore, our self -report data rel ied on retrospective 

assessment s that may have be en less sensitive to sleep loss than electrodermal measures 

collected in real time. 

Given the negative impact of sleep deprivation on the adaptation of emotional 

responses to prolonged, ambiguous threat, we expected that sleep loss would also disrupt the 

resolution of emotional arousal once the threat had dissipated. However , wh ile transitioning 

between threatening and non -threatening contexts prompted a general decrease in SCLs, this 

reduction in autonomic arousal did not significantly differ across the sleep -deprived and sleep -

rested conditions. One explanation for this outcome relates t o the varied cognitive demands 

of our immersive virtual world. Although top -down control processes are likely required to 

navigate ambiguously threatening contexts (e.g., to down regulate negative emotion s and 

unwanted thoughts), these processes become less necessary after the danger has passed .

From this perspective, the adverse effects of sleep loss on emotional and cognitive control 

would be expected to manifest as a failure to acclimatise to prolonged , ambiguous threat, but 

not as impairments in affective recovery upon reaching points of relative safety. 

As a corollary to this view, if sl eep deprivation impair s the top -down control 

mechanisms responsible for adaptively regulating emotions when confront ed with an 

ambiguous threat, then sleep -deprived individuals should engage in fewer goal -orientated 

thoughts than their sleep -rested counterparts. We explored this possibility by applying 

principal components analysis to our multidimensional experience sampling data . Whereas 

no between -condition differences were observed in the evening session, the sleep -depri ved 

individuals reported fewer goal -directed than the sleep -rested participants in the morning 

session, consistent with a recent study using a similar approach (18) .

Previous work has suggested that SWA during non -rapid eye movement sleep 

regulates anxiety via the restoration of prefrontal emotional control networks (3) , raising the 

possibility that SWA also supports emotional adaptation when exposed to prolonged, 

ambiguous threat. However , SWA was not significantly correlated with either the overnight 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

13 

change in state anxiety or the change in SCLs across the first and second blocks of ambiguous 

threat in the immersive virtual world. Th ese null results may be considered surprising given 

the reductions in SWA and non -rapid eye movement slow -wave sleep (where SWA 

predominates) observed in patients with anxiety related disorders and insomnia , as well as in 

non -clinical populations with high -trait anxiety (14 –17) , and highlight the need for further 

research to better understand the anxiolytic function of sleep. 

We a lso sought to explore factors that may mitigate the impact of sleep deprivation 

on emotional adaptation , focusing on resting heart rate variability (HRV) , given its putative 

role in affective and cognitive contr ol (22 –24) . Sleep loss increased arousal responses to 

ambiguous threat in participants with low HRV, but not participants with high HRV , raising the 

possibility that high HRV buffers against the deleterious impacts of sleep deprivation on 

emotional flexibility. Interestingly, this moderating effect of HRV emerged in our self -report ed 

arousal data (acquired via the playback task) and not in the SCL data, mirroring earlier work 

(25) . This may suggest that the sympathetic –parasympathetic balance, as indexed by high 

HRV, is better reflected in subjective, experiential regulation than in SCL .

In conclusion , we show that sleep deprivation disrupts emotional adaptation to 

prolonged and ambiguous threat , arising from a breakdown of goal -orientated cognition and 

leading to a heightened state of anxiety. Higher HRV confers resilience to the adverse effects 

of sleep loss on emotional control and warrants further investigation as a potential 

translational target. These findings provide new mechanistic insight into the central role of 

sleep problems in the emergence, persistence and resolution of anxiety .

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 14

Methods 

Pre -registration 

The study methods and analys es were pre -registered (osf.io/g4fte ). Deviations from our pre -

registered methods are outlined and justified in Supplementary Table 6 .

Participants 

Eighty -five healthy young adults (aged 18 -30 years) were recruited via an online recruitment 

platform and reported no history of neurological, psychiatric, attention, or sleep disorders. 

Participants completed several screening questionnaires and were excl uded if they exceeded 

the clinical threshold on the Beck Depression Index (BDI -II ≥ 18; 39) and/or the Beck Anxiety 

Inventory (BAI ≥ 16; 39 ), if they had an extreme diurnal preference on the Morningness -

Eveningness Questionnaire (MEQ < 31 or > 69 ; 40) , or if they scored poorly on the Pittsburgh 

Sleep Quality Index (PSQI >6; 41) . Inclusion was also contingent on participants reporting a 

consistent sleep schedule where they typically went to be d before 2am and rose by 8am 

having obtained at least six hours of sleep. Participants were excluded if they showed any 

abnormalities in physiological recordings (skin conductance levels and heart rate) during the 

virtual reality demo at session one (see Procedure ). Participants were not using any prescribed 

medications except for the female contraceptive pill. Following standard procedures in our 

lab oratory (41 –44) , participants were asked to refrain from caffeine and alcohol for 24 and 48 

hours, respectively, before the study commenced and until the study ended .

Sixty -four participants met the inclusion criteria and completed the experimental 

protocol (sleep deprivation condition : N=36 ; sleep rested condition : N=28). N=8 participants 

were excluded from the sleep deprivation condition because they slept for >2 hours during 

the overnight interval, as indicated by self -report and/or actigraphy data , and another 

withdrew after feeling nauseated by the virtual environment. One participant was excluded 

from the sleep rested condition due to sleeping <4 hours during the overnight interval (as 

indicated by their polysomnography data) . Therefore, our final sample size was N= 54 (sleep 

deprivation condition: N=27, 18 female, mean ±SD ag e=19.59 ± 2.06 years ; sleep rested 

condition: N=27, 15 female, mean ±SD ag e=20.30 ± 2.27 years ). To mitigate any potential 

influence of dispositional anxiety, participants in each condition were matched on trait anxiety 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 15

levels as indicated by the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory —Trait Version (STAI -T; t = 0.45, p = .652 ;

26) . Participants received £90 or BSc Psychology experimental participation credit for 

participating in the study. To reduce demand characteristics, the study was advertised and 

framed to investigate the effects of sleep on memory. Ethical approval for this study was 

obtained by the Department of Psychology Research Ethics Committee at the University of 

York and all participants provided written informed consent. 

Sample size requirements were informed by a power analysis. Our effects of interest 

were obtained from Ben Simon et al (3) who observed a deleterious effect of sleep deprivation 

on state anxiety , reflected by a significant interaction between condition (sleep rested or sleep 

deprived) and session (morning or evening; ɳρ2 = 0.3 6) and a positive correlation between 

SWA and state anxiety ( r = .53 ). Our power analysis was based on the latter, smaller effect. 

This indicated that N=27 participants were required to detect an effect of r = .53 (90% power ,

α = 0.05 , one -tailed) in the sleep rested condition. 

Procedure 

The study protocol comprised three sessions. In session one, participants completed an online 

screening questionnaire and a short virtual reality demo. This was composed of empty rooms 

without sound so that participants could acclimatise to the controls without being exposed to 

any ambiguous threat. Skin conductance level s (SCL s) and heart rate were recorded to mimic 

the main virtual environment and screen for any SCL -non -responders or electrocardiography 

(ECG) irregularities . Participants completed session one at least 24 hours before session two. 

At 9am on the morning of session two, participants collected an actigraphy watch and 

were instructed to wear it until the end of the study. During session two (~ 8.30pm ), they 

underwent a 5 -min resting heart rate recording and then completed the multidimensional 

experience sampling (MDES ) protocol ( 32 –36) . For MDES, participants were presented with a 

series of 13 thought probes and, for each, were asked to indicate on a scale of 1 to 10 the 

extent to which their recent thoughts were aligned with the probe (e.g., my thoughts involved 

future events – 1: Not at all, 10: Completely; see Supplementary Table 5 for the full set of 

thought probes). Afterwards, participants completed the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory —State 

Version (STAI -S; 26 ), the Stanford Sleepiness Scale (SSS; 28 ) and the psychomotor vigilance 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 16

task PVT; 29 ). They were then informed whether they had been assigned to the sleep rested 

or sleep deprivation condition. 

Sessions two and three were separated by an overnight interval during which 

participants either remained awake (i.e., were sleep deprived) or slept in the sleep laboratory .

Participants in the sleep deprivation condition were sent home and permitted to 

communicate, read, use electronic devices, watch TV, or play games. The decision to send 

participants home was in response to an institutional recommendation to minimise face -to -

face contact as the UK emerged from the COVID -19 pandemic. Adherence to the sleep 

deprivation protocol was verified with actigraphy , which confirmed that all sleep -deprived 

participant s remained awake throughout the night . Participants in the sleep deprivation 

condition were also sent an electronic questionnaire and instructed to answer questions every 

30 minutes between 11pm and 6.30am , before returning to the lab at 8am (95.48% of 

questions were answered during the overnight interval 1). In the sleep -rested condition, 

participants were wired up for polysomnography and lights were turned out at ~11pm. They 

were woken up at ~7am. 

Session three began at ~8.30am and participants repeated the MDES protocol ,

questionnaires and PVT. Sleep -deprived participants also completed a questionnaire probing 

their adherence to the sleep deprivation protocol and activities they engaged in throughout 

the night (see Supplementary Table 7 for further details ). Participants then entered the 

immersive virtual world while SCL and heart rate were continuously monitored. 

The virtual world began with a n auditory prelude that included a dramatic background 

story and the participants’ instructions. Specifically, participants were told that they had 

woken in a laboratory after a violent incident. Researchers were trapped and held captive by 

a malevolent group intent on destroying an experimental drug designed to eradicate evil. The 

participants were told that the researchers’ survival depended on them collecting red and 

blue lanterns. They started the virtual task in an office room, which was well lit and included 

basic furnishings (e.g., desks and chairs). This served as a non -threatening baseline. Uplifting 

music was also playing to create a sense of ease. After 1 min, the door to a freight elevator 

opened and participants descended to a basement level where they moved through the fi rst     

> 1Note that two sleep deprived participants did not complete the questionnaire due to technical difficulties .
> However, actigraphy data confirmed they remained awake throughout the night.
> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 17

block of ambiguously threatening rooms ( Hospital Ward , Storage Room , Autopsy Room ). 

These rooms were designed to evoke sustained feelings of unease rather than discrete 

unambiguous scares and thus were characterised by dark, unsettling environments (requiring 

torchlight) with ominous background music and menacing sound effects (e.g., footsteps and 

whispers ; 11, 46 –49) . Participants remained in each room for 30 seconds (until a door to the 

next room opened) and were explicitly instructed to explore the space during this period and 

retrieve the lanterns . The first ambiguously threatening block was followed by a non -

threatening block of three separate office spaces, which were each similar to the office room 

at the beginning of the experience. The instructions were the same as for the previous block. 

After this, participants completed a second ambiguously threatening block ( Bathroom , Torture 

Chamber , Kitchen) before ascend ing via the freight elevator back to an office room , similar to 

the one that they had started in , remaining there for 30 seconds (serving as a second non -

threatening block) . A video of the virtual world is available at  https://youtu.be/zm6pLPliZv0 .

Next, participants completed a playback task where they watched a first -person 

recording of their virtual experience and were instructed to retrospectively rate how they felt 

during every moment of the experience, using a joystick to position a curser on an affect grid 

with valence (unpleasant -pleasant) and arousal (excited -not at all excited) on the x axis and y 

axis, respectively (49, 50) . The magnitude of each axis varied from −100 to 10 0 and a circle 

depicted the current position of the joystick . Only responses on the arousal dimension of the 

affect grid w ere used in our analyses given the focus on the anxiogenic impact of sleep 

deprivation. 

After completing the playback task, p articipants returned the actigraphy watch and 

were debriefed before leaving the laboratory. 

Materials and equipment 

Questionnaires 

Self -reported anxiety was measured with the State -Trait Anxiety Inventory —State Version 

(26) . This comprises 20 items and indexes an individual’s feelings of anxiety at the current 

moment. Responses on each item vary from 1 (not at all) to 4 (very much so). Total state 

anxiety scores range from 20 –80, with higher scores reflecting higher levels of state anxiety. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 18

Sleepiness was measured with the Stanford Sleepiness Scale (28) . Respondents choose 

one of seven statements that best describes their current state, with each statement 

corresponding to an increasing level of sleepiness. 

Psychomotor vigilance task 

Participants were instructed to click a mouse button as quickly as possible when a digital 

counter appeared on the screen (29) . The inter -stimulus interval (ISI) varie d from 2 to 10 s and 

task duration is ~3 min. Response time feedback was provided on each trial. 

Heart rate variability (HRV) 

Resting heart rate was recorded using a BIOPAC MP36R data acquisition system with three -

lead ECG and disposable Ag/AGCl foam electrodes ( BIOPAC , EL503). Electrodes were placed 

on the sternal end of the right clavicle, left mid -clavicle (ground electrode), and lower left rib 

cage. Data were recorded via AcqKnowledge software (version 4.4.1 ). Participants were 

instructed to relax and remain still for 7 min without closing their eyes or crossing their feet. 

The first 2 min of data were excluded to permit acclimatisation. 

R-peaks (the maximum amplitude of an R wave in a QRS complex) were first identified 

using an automated routine in Acqknowledge . Missed and misclassified R -peaks were then 

manually added and removed, respectively. The interbeat interval time series was then 

exported into Kubios HRV Standard 3.5.0 Software (51) . We calculated the root mean square 

of successive difference (RMSSD) between normal heartbeats (a measure of vagally mediated 

HRV). RMSSD was chosen because it is the primary time -domain measure to estimate HRV 

(52) and has been shown to be reliable for short recordings (53) .

Virtual world 

The virtual world was adapted from the Underwood Project : a modular virtual environment 

for eliciting ambiguous threat, built in the Unity game creation env ironment (11) . Participants 

experienced the virtual world through an HTC Vive head -mounted display unit with an 

integrated Dual AMOLED 3.6 -inch diagonal screen (resolution : 1080 × 1200 pixels per eye, 

refresh rate: 90 Hz , field of view : 110° ). A wireless Vive controller was used so that participants 

could move around the virtual world using the dual -stage trigger. Audio was played through 

DOQUAS wireless headphones from a standard desktop computer. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 19

The playback task was administered on a standard desktop computer using the open -

source software DARMA (49) . Participants rated how they felt during every moment using the 

joystick of a wireless controller (Microsoft Xbox) .

Subjective arousal ratings obtain ed during the playback task were exported into R 

studio and z-scored within person , before being aggregated across the individual threatening 

and non -threatening blocks of the virtual world (i.e., separately for the first threatening block, 

first non -threatening block, second threatening block and second non -threatening block). 

Skin conductance level 

Psychop hysiological signals in the virtual world were recorded using a BIOPAC MP160 

acquisition system with AcqKnowledge software and sampled at 2000 Hz. SCL was recorded 

using a wireless BIOPAC BioNomadix amplifier (BN -PPGED) with a BioNomadix dual electrode 

lead and disposable Ag/AgCl foam electrodes ( BIOPAC , EL507a). The electrodes were attached 

to the middle phalanges of the left middle and index fingers using an isotonic electrode paste 

(BIOPAC Gel 101a) and the experimenter placed the BioNomadix trans mitter on the 

participant’s nondominant wrist . The system clocks on the psycho physiological acquisition 

computer and rendering computer (used for the virtual world) were synced to allow for data 

series alignment. 

We pre -registered that we would remove a rtefacts >2 s from the SCL data based on 

visual inspection in AcqKnowledge . H owever, all identified artefacts were <2 s and were 

therefore retained in the analysis . The data and event markers were then exported to R studio 

and downsampled to 500 Hz . SCL data were then z-scored within person before being 

aggregated across the individual threatening and non -threatening blocks of the virtual world .

Heart rate 

Heart rate in the virtual world was recorded using a wireless BIOPAC BioNomadix amplifier 

(BN -RSPEC) using the same three -lead ECG and electrodes as used for the resting heart rate 

recording. The transmitter belt was attached around participan ts’ chest .

Artefacts >2 s were removed from the ECG dat a based on visual inspection in 

Acqknowledge (7 artefacts across 5 participants ). R-peaks were automatically detected using 

Acqknowledge software and visually inspected for accuracy, as described for the HRV analysis. 

A list of R -peaks was then exported into R studio and i nstantaneous heart rate was calculated 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 20

using the R package RHRV (54) . Heart rate data were then z -scored within person before being 

aggregated across the individual threatening and non -threatening blocks of the virtual world. 

Sleep monitoring 

Polysomnographic sleep data was recorded using an Embla N7000 system (Embla Systems, 

Broomfield, CO, USA). The scalp was cleaned with NuPrep exfoliating agent before gold -plated 

electrodes were attached at eight standard locations according to the international 10 -20 

system ( REF ): F3, F4, C3, C4, P3, P4, O1, and O2 ; each referenced to the contralateral mastoid .

Left and right electrooculogram, left, right, and upper electromyogram, and a ground 

electrode (forehead) were also attached. All electrodes were verified to have a connection 

impedance of < 5 k Ω. All signals were digitally sampled at 200 Hz. 

Using RemLogic 3.4, polysomnography data were partitioned into 30 s epochs and 

scored as wakefulness, non -rapid eye movement sleep N1, N2 or N3 ( slow -wave sleep ), or 

rapid eye movement sleep , based on standardised criteria (55) . Epochs scored as N2 and N3 

were exported to MATLAB 2019a using the FieldTrip toolbox (v10/04/18) for spectral analysis. 

Noisy channels (identified during sleep scoring) were removed (7 channels across 6

participants) and other artefacts were removed using Fieldtrip’s data browser. Artefact -free 

N2 and N3 epochs across frontal (F3 and F4), central (C3 and C4), and parietal (P3 and P4 )

channels were applied to a Fast Fourier Transformation with a 10.24 second Hanning window 

and 50% overlap. Spectral power i n the delta band (0.8 –4.6 Hz) was divided by absolute power 

across all frequency bands to produce a normalised index of SWA (3) .

Actigraphy data were acquired with a Philips Actiwatch 2 (Philips Respironics) , which 

participants wore throughout the study. 

Analysis 

Unless otherwise specified, all analyses were run in R version 4. 5.2 (56) , and all plots were 

created using the R package ggplot2 (57) .

To examine whether sleep deprivation amplifie d emotional responses to ambiguous 

threat , we first calculated arousal change scores from baseline ( the office room at the 

beginning of the virtual world) during the first and second threatening blocks. Specifically, for 

each participant, aggregated baseline scores were subtracted from aggregated scores during 

each of the first and second threatening blocks, separately for SCL, heart rate and subjective 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 21

arousal . The resulting difference scores reflect the change in arousal from baseline, expressed 

in within -person standard deviation units, with h igher scores indicati ng a greater increase in 

arousal .

We also calculated change scores to investigate how sleep deprivation affected the 

resolution of emotional arousal once the ambiguous threat had subsided. This time, 

aggregated values for the first and second threatening blocks were subtracted from 

aggregated values for the adjacent first and second non -threatening blocks, respectively 

(separately for SCL, heart rate and subjective arousal). Lower scores indicated a greater 

reduction in emotional arousal (in standard deviation units ) when reaching a non -th reatening 

block of the virtual world. 

Change scores were applied to two -way mixed ANOVAs with the between -subjects 

factor Group (Sleep Rested or Sleep Deprived) and the within -subjects factor Block (One or 

Two). In the case of a significant Group *Block interaction, Bonferroni -corrected pairwise 

comparisons were performed. We report partial eta squared as our measure of effect size for 

all ANOVAs and Cohen’s d as our measure of effect size for all pairwise comparisons . All 

ANOVAs and pairwise tests were analysed using the R package rstatix (58) .

To assess whether SWA support s emotional adaptation to ambiguous threat , we first 

calculated the change in emotional arousal between the first and second ambiguously 

threatening blocks of the virtual world (separately for SCL, HR and subjective responses), with 

lower scores indicating a greater reduction in emotional affect (block two minus block one). 

These change scores were then each correlated with SWA in the sleep rested condition. 

Bonferroni -corrected p -values were used to account for multiple compari sons. All correlations 

were analysed using the Hmisc R package (59) .

To explore whether emotional dysregulation after sleep deprivation was related to 

impairments of goal -orientated cognition, multidimensional experience sampling scores were 

entered into a principal components analysis (PCA) using the psych package (60) . In keeping 

with earlier work (18) , we concatenated responses to the 13 thought probes at the evening 

and morning sessions into a single matrix and performed PCA with varimax rotation. MDES 

data were z -scored prior to analysis. Components were identified based on eigenvalues, and 

the inflection point in the scree plot ( see Supplementary Figure 1 ). Scores for each of the 

components were extracted for each participant and applied to a two -way mixed ANOVA with 

the between -subjects factor Group (Sleep Rested or Sleep Deprived) and the within -subjects 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

22 

factor Session (Evening or Morning). In the case of a significant Group *Session interaction, 

Bonferroni -corrected pairwise comparisons were performed. N = 14 participants were 

excluded from this analysis due to missing item data at one or both sessions. 

To ex amine whether higher levels of resting HRV mitigated the impact of sleep 

deprivation on adaptation to ambiguous threat we first  stratified participants into low and 

high HRV groups , using a median split of HRV ( RMSSD ) from the evening session (61) . Change 

scores for self -reported arousal and SCLs were applied to a three -way mixed ANOVAs with the 

between -subject factors Group (Sleep Rested or Sleep Deprived) and HRV (Low or High) , and 

the within -subjects factor Block (One or Two).  As for our main analysis, in the case of a 

significant interaction with HRV (e.g. , Group *HRV, Block*HRV, Group *Block*HRV ), Bonferroni -

corrected pairwise comparisons were performed. 

Data availability 

The data that support the findings of this study are available on the Open Science Framework 

(https://osf.io/m7tfd ).

Code availability 

The code used to analyse the data presented in this study is available on the Open Science 

Framework ( https://osf.io/m7tfd ).

Acknowledgements 

This research was supported by the University of York Department of Psychology Doctoral 

Studentship (ECS ) and Medical Research Council Career Development Award (MR -P020208 -1;

SAC) . SAC is funded by the European Union (ERC, SLEEPAWAY, 101169737). Views and opinions 

expressed are however those of the authors only and do not necessarily reflect those of the 

European Union or the European Research Council. Neither the European Union nor the 

granting authority can be held responsible for them. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 23

References 

1. C. Chinvararak , K. Goldsmith, T. Chalder, Prevalence of sleep disturbances and 

its associated factors in patients with generalised anxiety disorder: A systematic review 

and meta -analysis. Journal of Psychosomatic Research 195 , 112208 (2025). 

2. P. -J. Chen, et al. , Relapse insomnia increases greater risk of anxiety and 

depression: evidence from a population -based 4 -year cohort study. Sleep Medicine 38 ,

122 –129 (2017). 

3. E. Ben Simon, A. Rossi, A. G. Harvey, M. P. Walker, Overanxious and underslept. 

Nature Human Behaviour 4, 100 –110 (2020). 

4. Y. Wu, et al. , Trends in the epidemiology of anxiety disorders from 1990 to 2021: A 

global, regional, and national analysis with a focus on the sociodemographic index. 

Journal of Affective Disorders 373 , 166 –174 (2025). 

5. P. L. Franzen, D. J. Buysse, R. E. Dahl, W. Thompson, G. J. Siegle, Sleep 

deprivation alters pupillary reactivity to emotional stimuli in healthy young adults. 

Biological Psychology 80 , 300 –305 (2009). 

6. S. -S. Yoo, N. Gujar, P. Hu, F. A. Jolesz, M. P. Walker, The human emotional brain 

without sleep — a prefrontal amygdala disconnect. Current Biology 17 , R877 –R878 

(2007). 

7. A. Etkin, T. D. Wager, Functional Neuroimaging of Anxiety: A Meta -Analysis of 

Emotional Processing in PTSD, Social Anxiety Disorder, and Specific Phobia. American 

Journal of Psychiatry 164 , 1476 –1488 (2007). 

8. S. Bishop, J. Duncan, M. Brett, A. D. Lawrence, Prefrontal cortical function and 

anxiety: controlling attention to threat -related stimuli. Nat Neurosci 7, 184 –188 (2004). 

9. M. J. Kim, D. G. Gee, R. A. Loucks, F. C. Davis, P. J. Whalen, Anxiety Dissociates 

Dorsal and Ventral Medial Prefrontal Cortex Functional Connectivity with the Amygdala 

at Rest. Cerebral Cortex 21 , 1667 –1673 (2011). 

10. A. N. Goldstein -Piekarski, S. M. Greer, J. M. Saletin, M. P. Walker, Sleep 

Deprivation Impairs the Human Central and Peripheral Nervous System Discrimination 

of Social Threat. Journal of Neuroscience 35 , 10135 –10145 (2015). 

11. C. McCall, et al. , The underwood project: A virtual environment for eliciting 

ambiguous threat. Behav Res (2022). https://doi.org/10.3758/s13428 -022 -02002 -3. 

12. Y. Yang, et al. , Emotional habituation as a protective factor for resilience: Insights 

from ERP and hierarchical linear modeling. Journal of Affective Disorders 391 , 119965 

(2025). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 24

13. F. R. Walker, et al. , Habituation of the electrodermal response – A biological 

correlate of resilience? PLOS ONE 14 , e0210078 (2019). 

14. A. D. Krystal, J. D. Edinger, W. K. Wohlgemuth, G. R. Marsh, NREM Sleep EEG 

Frequency Spectral Correlates of Sleep Complaints in Primary Insomnia Subtypes. 

Sleep 25 , 626 –636 (2002). 

15. K. H. Fuller, W. F. Waters, P. G. Binks, T. Anderson, Generalized Anxiety and Sleep 

Architecture: A Polysomnographic Investigation. Sleep 20 , 370 –376 (1997). 

16. S. Yetkin, H. Aydin, F. Özgen, Polysomnography in patients with post -traumatic 

stress disorder. Psychiatry and Clinical Neurosciences 64 , 309 –317 (2010). 

17. A. Horváth, et al. , Effects of state and trait anxiety on sleep structure: A 

polysomnographic study in 1083 subjects. Psychiatry Research 244 , 279 –283 (2016). 

18. M. O. Harrington, et al. , Memory control deficits in the sleep -deprived human 

brain. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 122 , e2400743122 (2025). 

19. L. Staner, Sleep and anxiety disorders. Dialogues in Clinical Neuroscience 5,

249 –258 (2003). 

20. L. Palagini, et al. , Insomnia, anxiety and related disorders: a systematic review on 

clinical and therapeutic perspective with potential mechanisms underlying their 

complex link. Neuroscience Applied 3, 103936 (2024). 

21. American Psychiatric Association, Diagnostic and Statistical Manual of Mental 

Disorders, Fifth Edition, Text Revision (DSM -5-TR). DSM Library (2022). Available at: 

https://psychiatryonline.org/doi/abs/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425787 [Accessed 24 

April 2026]. 

22. B. M. Appelhans, L. J. Luecken, Heart Rate Variability as an Index of Regulated 

Emotional Responding. Review of General Psychology 10 , 229 –240 (2006). 

23. B. L. Gillie, M. W. Vasey, J. F. Thayer, Heart Rate Variability Predicts Control Over 

Memory Retrieval. Psychol Sci 25 , 458 –465 (2014). 

24. M. O. Harrington, J. E. Ashton, S. Sankarasubramanian, M. C. Anderson, S. A. 

Cairney, Losing Control: Sleep Deprivation Impairs the Suppression of Unwanted 

Thoughts. Clinical Psychological Science 9, 97 –113 (2021). 

25. L. K. Hildebrandt, C. McCall, H. G. Engen, T. Singer, Cognitive flexibility, heart rate 

variability, and resilience predict fine -grained regulation of arousal during prolonged 

threat. Psychophysiology 53 , 880 –890 (2016). 

26. C. D. Spielberger, State -Trait Anxiety Inventory. A Comparative Bibliography 

(1983). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 25

27. G. N. Pires, A. G. Bezerra, S. Tufik, M. L. Andersen, Effects of acute sleep 

deprivation on state anxiety levels: a systematic review and meta -analysis. Sleep 

Medicine 24 , 109 –118 (2016). 

28. E. Hoddes, V. Zarcone, H. Smythe, R. Phillips, W. C. Dement, Quantification of 

Sleepiness: A New Approach. Psychophysiology 10 , 431 –436 (1973). 

29. M. Y. Khitrov, et al. , PC -PVT: a platform for psychomotor vigilance task testing, 

analysis, and prediction. Behav Res Methods 46 , 140 –147 (2014). 

30. D. Konu, et al. , Exploring patterns of ongoing thought under naturalistic and 

conventional task -based conditions. Consciousness and Cognition 93 , 103139 (2021). 

31. F. J. M. Ruby, J. Smallwood, H. Engen, T. Singer, How Self -Generated Thought 

Shapes Mood —The Relation between Mind -Wandering and Mood Depends on the 

Socio -Temporal Content of Thoughts. PLoS ONE 8, e77554 (2013). 

32. F. J. M. Ruby, J. Smallwood, J. Sackur, T. Singer, Is self -generated thought a means 

of social problem solving? Front. Psychol. 4 (2013). 

33. J. Smallwood, et al. , Representing Representation: Integration between the 

Temporal Lobe and the Posterior Cingulate Influences the Content and Form of 

Spontaneous Thought. PLOS ONE 11 , e0152272 (2016). 

34. D. Konu, et al. , A role for the ventromedial prefrontal cortex in self -generated 

episodic social cognition. NeuroImage 218 , 116977 (2020). 

35. S. L. Chellappa, D. Aeschbach, Sleep and anxiety: From mechanisms to 

interventions. Sleep Medicine Reviews 61 , 101583 (2022). 

36. W. Boucsein, Electrodermal Activity (Springer US, 2012). 

37. S. D. Kreibig, Autonomic nervous system activity in emotion: A review. Biological 

Psychology 84 , 394 –421 (2010). 

38. A. T. Beck, R. A. Steer, G. K. Brown, Manual for the beck depression inventory -II. 

(Psychological Corporation, 1996). 

39. J. A. Horne, O. Östberg, A self -assessment questionnaire to determine 

morningness -eveningness in human circadian rhythms. International Journal of 

Chronobiology 4, 97 –110 (1976). 

40. D. J. Buysse, I. C. F. Reynolds, T. H. Monk, S. R. Berman, D. J. Kupfer, The 

Pittsburgh sleep quality index: A new instrument for psychiatric practice and research. 

Psychiatry Research 28 , 193 –213 (1989). 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint 26

41. J. W. A. Strachan, et al. , Investigating the formation and consolidation of 

incidentally learned trust. Journal of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory, and 

Cognition 46 , 684 (2020). 

42. A. á V. Guttesen, et al. , Sleep loss disrupts the neural signature of successful 

learning. Cerebral Cortex 33 , 1610 –1625 (2023). 

43. J. E. Ashton, B. P. Staresina, S. A. Cairney, Sleep bolsters schematically 

incongruent memories. PLOS ONE 17 , e0269439 (2022). 

44. M. O. Harrington, H. -V. V. Ngo, S. A. Cairney, No benefit of auditory closed -loop 

stimulation on memory for semantically -incongruent associations. Neurobiology of 

Learning and Memory 183 , 107482 (2021). 

45. R. Roberts, “Fear of the Unknown: Music and Sound Design in Psychological 

Horror Games” in Music In Video Games , (Routledge, 2014). 

46. T. C. Demarque, E. S. de Lima, Auditory Hallucination: Audiological Perspective 

for Horror Games. São Paulo (2013). 

47. C. Habel, B. Kooyman, Agency mechanics: gameplay design in survival horror 

video games. Digital Creativity 25 , 1 –14 (2014). 

48. F. Rigoli, M. Ewbank, T. Dalgleish, A. Calder, Threat visibility modulates the 

defensive brain circuit underlying fear and anxiety. Neuroscience Letters 612 , 7 –13 

(2016). 

49. J. M. Girard, A. C. G. Wright, DARMA: Software for dual axis rating and media 

annotation. Behav Res 50 , 902 –909 (2018). 

50. C. McCall, L. K. Hildebrandt, B. Bornemann, T. Singer, Physiophenomenology in 

retrospect: Memory reliably reflects physiological arousal during a prior threatening 

experience. Consciousness and Cognition 38 , 60 –70 (2015). 

51. M. P. Tarvainen, J. -P. Niskanen, J. A. Lipponen, P. O. Ranta -Aho, P. A. Karjalainen, 

Kubios HRV --heart rate variability analysis software. Comput Methods Programs 

Biomed 113 , 210 –220 (2014). 

52. F. Shaffer, J. P. Ginsberg, An Overview of Heart Rate Variability Metrics and 

Norms. Front Public Health 5, 258 (2017). 

53. U. Nussinovitch, et al. , Reliability of Ultra -Short ECG Indices for Heart Rate 

Variability. Annals of Noninvasive Electrocardiology 16 , 117 –122 (2011). 

54. L. Rodriguez -Linares, et al. , RHRV: Heart Rate Variability Analysis of ECG Data. 

(2022). Deposited 31 October 2022. 

> .CC-BY 4.0 International license made available under a (which was not certified by peer review) is the author/funder, who has granted bioRxiv a license to display the preprint in perpetuity. It is The copyright holder for this preprint this version posted June 25, 2026. ;https://doi.org/10.64898/2026.06.21.733648 doi: bioRxiv preprint

27 

55. C. Iber, S. Ancoli -Israel, A. L. Chesson, S. F. Quan, The AASM manual for the 

scoring of sleep and associated events: rules, terminology and technical specifications. 

American academy of sleep medicine (2007). 

56. R: The R Project for Statistical Computing. (2025). Available at: https://www.r -

project.org/ [Accessed 26 May 2026]. 

57. H. Wickham, ggplot2: Elegant Graphics for Data Analysis , 2nd Ed. (Springer 

International Publishing, 2016). 

58. A. Kassambara, rstatix: Pipe -Friendly Framework for Basic Statistical Tests. 

(2023). Deposited 1 February 2023. 

59. F. Harrell, Hmisc: Harrell Miscellaneous. (2023). Deposited 8 May 2023. 

60. W. Revelle, psych: Procedures for Psychological, Psychometric, and Personality 

Research. (2026). Deposited 16 May 2026. 

61. D. Iacobucci, S. S. Posavac, F. R. Kardes, M. J. Schneider, D. L. Popovich, The 

median split: Robust, refined, and revived. Journal of Consumer Psychology 25 , 690 –

704 (2015).